Matisse Picasso and Gertrude Stein
With Two Shorter Stories

Gertrude Stein




[Transcriber's Note: All apparent spelling errors, possible typos, and
one (missing?) period have been checked against the images used for
transcription, and left as found. This transcription was made from a
modern edition, and it is not clear if these oddities were intended or
introduced. Please consult an authoritative edition before quoting from
this transcription.]


Matisse Picasso
and Gertrude Stein

_Also known as: G.M.P._

With Two Shorter Stories




A LONG GAY BOOK 1909-1912
MANY MANY WOMEN 1910
G.M.P. 1911-1912




A LONG GAY BOOK




When they are very little just only a baby you can never tell which
one is to be a lady.

There are some when they feel it inside them that it has been with them
that there was once so very little of them, that they were a baby,
helpless and no conscious feeling in them, that they knew nothing then
when they were kissed and dandled and fixed by others who knew them when
they could know nothing inside them or around them, some get from all
this that once surely happened to them to that which was then every bit
that was then them, there are some when they feel it later inside them
that they were such once and that was all that there was then of them,
there are some who have from such a knowing an uncertain curious kind of
feeling in them that their having been so little once and knowing
nothing makes it all a broken world for them that they have inside them,
kills for them the everlasting feeling; and they spend their life in
many ways, and always they are trying to make for themselves a new
everlasting feeling.

One way perhaps of winning is to make a little one to come through them,
little like the baby that once was all them and lost them their
everlasting feeling. Some can win from just the feeling, the little one
need not come, to give it to them.

And so always there is beginning and to some then a losing of the
everlasting feeling. Then they make a baby to make for themselves a new
beginning and so win for themselves a new everlasting feeling.

It is never very much to be a baby, to be such a very little thing and
knowing nothing. It certainly is a very little thing and almost nothing
to be a baby and without a conscious feeling. It is nothing, to be,
without anything to know inside them or around them, just a baby and
that was all there was once of them and so it is a broken world around
them when they think of this beginning and then they lose their
everlasting feeling.

Then they make a baby or they have the feeling and so they win what once
a baby lost them.

It is not very much to be a baby. It certainly is nothing just to be
one, to be without a conscious feeling. It is something to have a baby
come into the world by way of them but it certainly is not very much to
have been the little thing that was once all them.

It is something to have a baby come into the world through them. It is
nothing just to be one.

First then they make a baby. No it is never very much just to be a baby.
Later in life when one is proud as a man or as a lady it is not right
that they ever could have dandled and kissed and fixed them, helpless,
just a baby. Such ones never can want to feel themselves ever to have
been a baby.

No it is not very much to be a baby. It is not right to one to begin
them until a little they can resist to them who would hold them
helpless, kiss and dandle and fix them as they were then, such a very
little thing, just nothing inside to them. I say it is not right to many
of them then to begin them, but it is not all of them who would resist
them. There are some who do not feel it to be bad inside them to have
been a baby without any conscious feeling of themselves inside them, to
have been a little thing and that was all there was then of them, they
are some who have not any proud kind of feeling in them.

They are some who like it in their later living that they were then such
a very little thing and that was then all there was of them and then
others kissed and dandled and fixed them. They are those who are within
them weak or tender as the strongest thing inside them and to them it is
very much to have been a baby and to have had others to feel gently
toward them, who kissed and dandled and fixed the helpless bundle they
were then. With them being proud is not strong inside them.

Some, and we can know them, have a curious uncertain kind of feeling
when they think of themselves as they were then and some so lose the
feeling of continuous life inside them.

It is a very different feeling each kind of man and woman has inside in
them about the baby the very little thing that was once all them, and
the little thing that comes into the world by them, and the very little
things that all about fill the world every moment with beginning.

There are many kinds of men and many kinds of women and each kind of
them have a different feeling in them about the baby that was once all
them. There are many kinds of men and many kinds of women and there are
many millions made of each kind of them. Each one of the many millions
of each kind of them have it in them a little to be different from all
the other millions of their kind of them, but all of each kind of them
have it in them to have the same kind of feeling about the little thing
that was once all them, about the little things that come to a beginning
through them, about the little things beginning all around them. There
are many kinds of men and many kinds of women and this will be a history
of all the kinds of them and of pairs of them.

As I was saying every man and every woman was a little baby once and
knowing nothing. I am saying there are many ways of feeling it inside
them in the many kinds of men and women that they were little things
once then and that was then all there was of them and they were dandled
and fixed and kissed then, little things then and knowing nothing.

I am saying that there are many kinds of men and women and many millions
made of each kind of them. Each one of the many millions of them has it
in him to be different from all the millions of his kind of them. I am
saying that all the millions of one kind of men or one kind of women
have it in them to have the same kind of feeling inside them about the
little thing that was all them, the baby that once was all there was of
them then. One kind then of men and women have it in them when they know
this was once all of them a little baby then and knowing nothing, one
kind of men and one kind of women have it in them then to lose inside
them their everlasting feeling, the world is then a broken world inside
them, more broken for them then than death breaks it for them, ending is
less of a breaking to such kind of them than beginning, they have then
when they think it inside them that they were a baby then and knowing
nothing they have then inside a loss of the everlasting feeling, to such
a one such a beginning, being a baby and knowing nothing, breaks the
everlasting feeling breaks it as dying as ending never can break it for
them.

There are many ways for men and women to have it in them that they were
little babies once and knowing nothing, that they were little babies
once and full of life and kicking, that they were little babies once and
others kissed them and dandled them and fixed them, that they were
little babies once and they had loving all around and in them, that they
had earthy love inside them.

Some people in their later living have pride in them, some never have
anything of such a thing in them. There are many kinds of men and women
and many millions of each kind of them and there is this history of all
the kinds of them.

Every one has in them a fundamental nature to them with a kind of way
of thinking that goes with this nature in them in all the many millions
made of that kind of them. Every one then has it in them to be one of
the many kinds of men or many kinds of women. There are many kinds of
men and many kinds of women and of each kind of them there are always
many millions in the world and any one can know by watching the many
kinds there are of them and this is to be a history of all the kinds of
them.

Every one of the kinds of them has a fundamental nature common to each
one of the many millions of that kind of them a fundamental nature that
has with it a certain way of thinking, a way of loving, a way of having
or not having pride inside them, a way of suffering, a way of eating, a
way of drinking, a way of learning, a way of working, a way of
beginning, a way of ending. There are many kinds of them but everywhere
in all living any one who keeps on looking can find all the kinds of
them.

There are many kinds of them then many kinds of fundamental nature in
men and in women. Sometimes it takes long to know it in them which kind
of fundamental nature is inside them. Sometimes it takes long to know it
in them, always there is mixed up with them other kinds of nature with
the kind of fundamental nature of them, giving a flavor to them,
sometimes giving many flavors to them, sometimes giving many
contradictions to them, sometimes keeping a confusion in them and some
of them never make it come right inside them. Mostly all of them in
their later living come to the repeating that old age gives almost
always to every one and then the fundamental nature of them comes out
more and more in them and more and more we get to know it in them the
fundamental nature in each one of them.

Always all the men and women all around have in them some one of the
many kinds of men and women that have each one of them many millions
made like them, always all the men and women all around have it in them
to have one fundamental nature in them and other kinds of nature are
mixed up in them with this kind of nature in them so it takes all the
knowing one can learn with all the living to ever know it about any one
around them the fundamental nature of them and how everything is mixed
up in them.

As I was saying the mixture in them of other kinds of nature to them
gives a flavor to some kinds of them to some kinds of men and some kinds
of women, makes a group of them that have to them flavor as more
important in them than the fundamental nature in them and the kind of
thinking and feeling that goes with the fundamental nature in them. The
flavor in them is real inside them more real to them than the
fundamental nature in them, the flavor the other kinds of nature mixed
up in them give to them. To many of such a kind of them the flavor is to
them the reallest thing in them, the reallest thing about them, and this
is a history of many of such of them.

In this book there will be discussion of pairs of people and their
relation, short sketches of innumerable ones, Ollie, Paul; Paul,
Fernande; Larr and me, Jane and me, Hattie and Ollie, Margaret and
Phillip, Claudel and Mrs. Claudel, Claudel and Martin, Maurice and Jane,
Helen and John, everybody I know, Murdock and Elise, Larr and Elise,
Larr and Marie, Jenny Fox and me, Sadie and Julia, everybody I can think
of ever, narrative after narrative of pairs of people, Martin and Mrs.
Herford, Bremer and Hattie, Jane and Nellie, Henrietta and Jane and some
one and another one, everybody Michael and us and Victor Herbert,
Farmert and us, Bessie Hessel and me.

Some one if they dreamed that their mother was dead when they woke up
would not put on mourning. Some if they believed in dreams as much as
the one who dreamed that their mother was dead and did not put on
mourning would if they had dreamed that their mother was dead would put
on mourning. Hattie if she dreamed that her mother was dead would not
put on mourning. Mrs. Claudel if she believed in dreams as much as
Hattie and had dreamed that her mother was dead would put on mourning.

Some would be surprised that some could dream that their mother was dead
and then not put on mourning. Some would be surprised that any one
having dreamed that their mother was dead could think about then putting
on mourning.

Some people know other ones. This is being a history of kinds of men and
women, when they were babies and then children and then grown men and
women and then old ones and the one and the ones they were in relation
with at any time, at some time.

This is a general leading up to a description of Olive who is an
exception in being one being living. Then there can be a description of
the Pauline group and of the Pauline quality in Ollie and then there can
be a complete description of the Pauline group and there can be a
description of ones who could be ones who are not at all married ones a
whole group of them of hundreds of them, and they grade from Eugenia to
Mabel Arbor who is not like them in being one who could have been one
not being a married one. Then once more one can begin with the Pauline
group and Sophie among them, and then one can go through whole groups of
women to Jane Sands and her relation to men and so to a group of men
and ending up with Paul. Then one can take a fresh start and begin with
Fanny and Helen and run through servants and adolescents to Lucy and so
again to women and to men and how they love, how women love and how they
do not love, how men do not love, how men do love, how women and men do
and do not love and so on to men and women in detail and so on to Simon
as a type of man.

Then going completely in to the flavor question how persons have the
flavor they do there can be given short sketches of Farmert, Alden, of
Henderson and any other man one can get having very much flavor and
describing the complications in them one can branch off into women,
Myrtle, Constance, Nina Beckworth and others to Ollie and then say of
them that it is hard to combine their flavor with other feelings in them
but it has been done and is being done and then describe Pauline and
from Pauline go on to all kinds of women that come out of her, and then
go on to Jane, and her group and then come back to describe Mabel Arbor
and her group, then Eugenia's group always coming back to flavor idea
and Pauline type, then go on to adolescents, mixing and mingling and
contrasting. Then start afresh with Grace's group, practical, pseudo
masculine. Then start afresh with Fanny and Helen and business women,
earthy type, and kind of intellect. Enlarge on this and then go back to
flavor, to pseudo flavor, Mildred's group, and then to the concentrated
groups.

From then on complicate and complete giving all kinds of pictures and
start in again with the men. Here begin with Victor Herbert group and
ramify from that. Simon is bottom of Alden and Bremer and the rest. Go
on then to how one would love and be loved as a man or as a woman by
each kind that could or would love any one.

Any one being started in doing something is going on completely doing
that thing, a little doing that thing, doing something that is that
thing. Any one not knowing anything of any one being one starting that
one in doing that thing is one doing that thing completing doing that
thing and being then one living in some such thing.

Some are ones being certain that any one doing a thing and having been
started in doing that thing are ones not having been taught to do that
thing, are ones who have come to do that thing. Some are certain that
not any one has been taught to do a thing if that one is doing a thing
and not any one is remembering that that thing is something that has
just been done.

Doing something is interesting to some, if not any one is remembering
that that thing has just been done. Doing something is interesting to
some if not any one is remembering that any one was one beginning doing
some such thing. Doing something is interesting to some when those are
remembering that every one has been doing that thing in having been
shown that thing. Doing something is interesting to some when they are
certain that all having been doing that thing have been completely dead
and have not been forgotten. Doing something is interesting to some when
they are certain that very many being dead were ones completely doing
that thing. Doing things are interesting to some when some one is
beginning to be finishing having done that thing. Doing something is
interesting to some when they are remembering that every one could be
doing that thing. Doing something is interesting to some when they are
certain that every one should do that thing.

When some are very little ones they very completely do some thing. Some
are certain that every one when they are very little ones are ones who
could very completely do some thing. Some when they are very little ones
very completely then do something. Some then find in this thing that
beginning and ending is not at all something being existing. Some find
in this thing that beginning and ending is not at all interesting. Some
are finding in this thing that nothing is satisfying. Some are finding
in this thing that some other thing is interesting. Some are finding in
this thing that any one is being one being living. Some are finding in
this thing that every one is one being existing. Some are finding in
this thing that very many are being existing and are not completing then
anything.

Some are certain that when any one is a very little one they are not
then beginning anything. Some are finding in this thing that beginning
and ending is being existing. Some are finding in this thing that
beginning and ending are not being existing. Some are not finding
anything in this thing. Some are finding in this thing that any one is
being existing. Some are finding in this thing that some are being
existing. Some are finding in this thing that not any one is being
existing.

Any one being one being a little one is being then one having some,
having some one knowing something of that thing. Some being a little one
are asking then how some other one could have been one being a little
one. Some being a little one are then not needing anything of asking
anything. Some being a little one are forgetting then having been asking
anything. Some being a very little one are not then needing being one
being existing.

Some are not needing that any one being a little one is then being
existing. Some are not needing any one being a little one. Some are not
needing any one having been a little one. Some are not needing that any
one has been one being existing. Some are needing that every one is
being one being existing.

Being a little one is what any one being existing is being one knowing
is existing. Being a little one is then existing enough for every one to
be knowing something of some such thing.

Any one loving any one is being one in some way loving some one. There
can be complete lists of ones loving. There can be complete lists of
ones loving again and again.

If there is a thin thing and some one is seeing through that thing if
there is a thin thing, very many are telling about seeing through that
thing. If there is a thin thing some are saying that it is like some
other thing. If there is a thin thing some are denying that it is a thin
thing. If there is a thin thing some are not hearing what some one has
been saying who has been saying that the thin thing is a thin thing.

There are thin things and some of them are hanging in front of
something. There are thin things and they are nicely thin things, things
nicely being thin enough and letting then all the light in. If there are
thin things they are thin enough to hang and let light in. If there are
thin things it is certain that they are like some other things. There
are thin things and any one not having seen them is not completely
certain that they are thin things. They are thin things the things that
are thin things and some have seen them and have said then that those
things are thin things.

A man in his living has many things inside him. He has in him his being
certain that he is being one seeing what he is looking at just then, he
has in him the kind of certain feeling of seeing what he is looking at
just then that makes a kind of them of which a list will be made in
making out a list of every one. This feeling of being certain of seeing
what he is looking at just then comes from the being in him that is
being then in him, comes from the mixing in him of being then one being
living and being one then being certain of that thing.

In all of the men being living some are more certain than other ones who
are very much like them are more certain of seeing the thing at which
they are looking.

In all men in their daily living, in every moment they are living, in
all of them, in all the time they are being living, in the times they
are doing, in the times they are not doing something, in all of them
there is always something in them of being certain of seeing the thing
at which they are looking. In all of them in all the millions of men
being living there is some feeling of being certain of seeing the thing
at which they are looking. Some of the many millions of men being living
have stronger the feeling of being certain of seeing the thing at which
they are looking than others of them.

There are many millions of men being living and many millions are very
certain that they are seeing the thing at which they are looking. In
many men there is a mixture in them of being strongly certain of seeing
the thing at which they are looking and just being certain that they are
seeing the thing at which they are looking. In some men there is a
mixture in them of being certain of being strongly certain, of not being
strongly certain, of being quite certain, of being uncertain that they
are seeing the thing at which they are all looking. In all the men who
are being living there is something of being certain of seeing the thing
at which they are looking. In all the men who are being living there is
a kind of feeling about being certain of seeing that at which they are
looking.

Loving is loving and being a baby is something. Loving is loving. Being
a baby is something. Having been a baby is something. Not having been a
baby is something that comes not to be anything and that is a thing that
is beginning. Having been a baby is something having been going on being
existing. Not having been a baby is something not being existing. Loving
is loving. Not having been a baby could be everything. Having been a
baby is something. Being a baby is something. Loving is something.
Loving is loving. Not being a baby is something.

Any one has been a baby and has then been something. Any one is not a
baby and is then something. Not coming to be a baby is not anything. Not
coming to be loving is something. Coming to be loving is something.
Loving is something. Babies have been existing. Babies are existing.
Babies are something being existing. Not being babies is something being
existing.

Loving is something. Anything is something. Babies are something. Being
a baby is something. Not being a baby is something.

Coming to be anything is something. Not coming to be anything is
something. Loving is something. Not loving is something. Loving is
loving. Something is something. Anything is something.

Anything is something. Not coming to anything is something. Loving is
something. Needing coming to something is something. Not needing to
coming to something is something. Loving is something. Anything is
something.

How can any one be one any one is loving when every one is a fat one or
a thin one or in between. How can any one be one loving any one when
every one is one not loving some. Every one loving any one is a thin
one or a fat one or in between. Any one loving any one is one loving in
being a fat one or a thin one or in between. Being a fat one and loving
is something. Being a thin one and loving is something. Being in between
being a thin one and being a fat one and loving is something. Being a
fat one or being a thin one or being in between is being one being that
one. Loving is something. Being a fat one is something. Being a thin one
is something. Being in between being a fat one and a thin one is
something. Being loving is something. Being not loving is something.
Being believing in loving is something. Being not believing in loving is
something. Being certain that not being a baby is something is
something. Being certain that being a baby is something is something.
Why is any one being something? Any one is being something because any
one is being one being a fat one or a thin one or in between.

Loving is being existing. Loving has been being existing. Loving being
existing and some being ones being loving and some having been ones
being loving loving is being existing. Loving is being existing and some
are ones being loving. Loving is being existing and some are ones some
are loving. Loving is being existing and some are believing that loving
is being existing. Loving is being existing and some are believing that
babies are being existing. Babies are being existing and some are
believing that loving is being existing. Babies are being existing.
Loving is being existing. Some are believing that loving and babies are
being existing. Any one can come to believe that babies have been
existing. Some can come to believe that loving has been existing. Some
babies are being living. Any one can come to believe that some babies
are being living. Believing something is what some are doing. Not
believing something is what some are doing. Loving is what some are
doing. Not loving are what some are doing. Being one being that one is
something. Any one being that one is being that one. Loving is existing.
Believing is existing. Any one is existing. Babies are existing.
Anything any one has been beginning is something. Any one begun is
something. Not any one is certain of being begun when they are babies.
Not any one is then certain of that thing that anything is something.
Some loving is existing. Some babies are existing. Loving being existing
is something. Some being existing is something. Any one being existing
is something. Not every one being existing is something. Everything is
something. Any one can be certain that not anything is anything. Any one
can be certain that loving is not existing. Any one can be certain that
babies are existing. Any one can be certain of something. Some can be
certain that loving is existing. Some can be certain of anything. Some
can be certain that loving is existing. Some can be certain of anything.
Some can be certain that babies are existing. Some can be certain of
that thing.

Some can be certain of something. Some can be certain that babies are
existing. Some can be certain of anything. Some can be certain that
babies are existing. Some can not be certain of something. Some can not
be certain that babies are existing. Some can not be certain of
anything, they cannot be certain that babies are existing. Some cannot
be certain of everything, some of such of them can be certain that
babies are existing, some of such of them can not be certain of babies
being existing.

Every one being some one, every one is like some other one. Every one is
like some is like some other one. Each one is a kind of a one. Each one
is of a kind of a one and of that kind of them some one is a very bright
one, some one is a stupid one, some one is a pretty one, some one is an
ugly one, some one is a certain one, some one is an uncertain one, some
one is in between being a bright one and a stupid one, some one is in
between being a pretty one and an ugly one, some one is in between being
a certain one and an uncertain one.

There are kinds of them that is to say there are some who look like
others quite look like others. All of them are of that kind of them, all
who are ones who look like some, all of them are together that kind of
them. There can be lists and lists of kinds of them. There can be very
many lists of kinds of them. There can be diagrams of kinds of them,
there can be diagrams showing kinds of them and other kinds of them
looking a little like another kind of them. There can be lists and
diagrams, some diagrams and many lists. There can be lists and diagrams.
There can be lists.

It is a simple thing to be quite certain that there are kinds in men and
women. It is a simple thing and then not any one has any worrying to be
doing about any one being any one. It is a simple thing to be quite
certain that each one is one being a kind of them and in being that kind
of a one is one being, doing, thinking, feeling, remembering and
forgetting, loving, disliking, being angry, laughing, eating, drinking,
talking, sleeping, waking like all of them of that kind of them. There
are enough kinds in men and women so that any one can be interested in
that thing that there are kinds in men and women.

It is a very simple thing to be knowing that there are kinds in men and
women. It is a simple thing to be knowing that being born in a religion,
in a country, in a position is a thing that is not disturbing anything.
It is a different thing to the one being that one, quite a different
thing. It is quite a different thing and each one is of a kind of them
is completely quite of a kind of them and it is an interesting thing to
some to make groups of them, to diagram kinds of them, to have lists of
them, of kinds in men and women. Some are not worrying are not at all
worrying about men and women. Some of such of them are knowing that
there are kinds of them. Some of such of them have some lists of them.
Some of such of them have diagrams of the kinds there are of them.

Any one being one being of a kind of one is doing something. Every one
is doing something. That is an interesting thing to some. Some are
having lists of ones doing anything. Some are having diagrams of that
thing.

Any one is one doing something. Any one is one being of a kind of one
and is one doing something in the way the ones looking like that one are
doing something.

Being a dead one is something. Being a dead one is something that is
happening. Being a dead one being something that is happening, some are
completely knowing that thing knowing that being a dead one is something
that is happening. Being loving is something that is happening. Being
loving is happening. Being a dead one is happening.

Being loving is happening. Being a dead one is happening. Completely
loving is something that is happening. Being a dead one is something
that is happening. Some are knowing all that thing, are quite knowing
all that thing.

Being completely loving is something that is happening. Being completely
loving is something that is completely happening. Being a dead one is
something that is happening. Being completely loving is something that
is happening. Being completely loving is something that is happening and
some then are completely knowing that thing, are knowing that completely
loving is happening. Being a dead one is certainly happening. Some are
knowing all of that thing, of being a dead one being happening. Some are
knowing all of completely loving being happening and are completely
using that thing completely using loving being completely happening.
Being a dead one is completely happening. There is then not any way of
using any such thing of being a dead one being happening. Any one can
know something of being a dead one being happening. Some can know
completely such a thing. Some of such of them are not needing to be
using such a thing. Some of such of them are completely using loving
being completely happening.

Loving can be completely happening. Some can then be using that thing
and needing then that everything is beginning. Loving can be completely
happening. Some can then be completely using that thing and can be then
not be beginning, not be ending anything. Loving can be completely
happening. Some can use something then in knowing that thing. Being a
dead one is completely happening. Some can completely use that thing.

Any one knowing anything is repeating that thing and being one repeating
that thing makes of that one one coming to be one knowing something of
some being ones beginning some other thing, beginning that thing. Any
one having been doing anything and repeating the thing and not repeating
the thing can come to be one knowing something of some being ones not
saying anything in any way about that thing. Any one buying something
and then not going on buying that thing can be one knowing something of
some not saying anything to that one, saying very little to that one.

Being a young one and an older one and a middle aged one and an older
one and an almost old one and an old one is something that any one can
know by remembering reading. Remembering reading is something any one is
needing to be one knowing that one is being a young one, an older one, a
middle aged one, an almost old one, an old one.

When they are very little just a baby they cannot know that thing. When
they are a little bigger they can know that other ones are older and
younger. When they are a little bigger they can remember that they were
littler. When they are a little older they can know that they are then
not what any one is describing, they are knowing then that they are
older than the description, than every description of the age they are
then. When they are older they are beginning to remember their reading,
they are beginning to believe a description of them. When they are a
little older they are knowing then that they just have been younger.
When they are a little older they are beginning to know they will be
older. When they are a little older they know they are old enough to
know that age is a different thing than it has been. When they are a
little older they are knowing they are beginning then to be young to
some who are much older and they are beginning to be old to some who are
much younger. When they are a little older they know they are beginning
to be afraid of changing thinking about ageing, they are beginning then
to know something of being uncertain about what is being young and what
is being old, they are beginning then to be afraid of everything. When
they are a little older they are coming to be certain that they have
been younger. When they are a little older they are beginning to be
certain that age has no meaning. When they are coming to be a little
older they are coming to be saying that they are beginning to be
wondering if age has not some meaning. When they are a little older they
are certainly beginning to be believing what they remembered reading
about being young and older and middle aged and older and almost old and
old. When they are a little older they are commencing to be certain that
ageing has meaning. When they are a little older they are certain that
they can be older and that being older will sometime be coming. When
they are a little older they are commencing mentioning ageing to prepare
any one for some such thing being something that will be showing in
them. When they are a little older they are commencing mentioning that
they are expecting anything. When they are a little older they are
commencing mentioning any such thing quite often. When they are a little
older they are not mentioning being an older one, they are then
mentioning that many are existing who are being young ones. When they
are a little older they are mentioning anything and mentioning it quite
often. When they are a little older any one is mentioning that thing and
not mentioning everything and they are mentioning being a little older
and they are mentioning everything. When they are a little older it
depends then on how much longer they will be being living just how long
they will be mentioning anything again and again. They are then
completely old ones and not any one is knowing everything of that thing.

Knowing everything is something. Knowing everything and telling all of
that thing is something. Knowing everything and not meaning anything in
knowing everything is something.

Meaning something is something. Meaning something and telling that thing
is something.

Knowing something is something. Knowing something and not meaning
anything is something. Knowing something and not meaning anything and
telling that thing is something.

Any one having finished needing being that one is one who might finish
then in some way being that one. Any one having finished needing being
that one is one going on being that one. Any one being finished with
needing being that one is one who might then come to almost finish being
that one. Any one coming to be finished with needing being that one
might come then to finish being one.

Any one meeting any one who might come to finish being that one is
believing is not believing that one will come then to finish being one.
Some do then finish being one. Some do then not finish being any one.
Any one can believe of any one who is finished being that one that that
one will finish being one.

Any one can be finished with some one. Any one can be finished with
some. Some can be finished with some. Some can be finished with some
one.

Any one can be finished with some. Any one can be finished with some
one. Some one is one some one can be finished with and that one is then
one who is not finished with another one.

Finishing with one finishing with another one is something any one doing
that thing is doing. Finishing with any one is what any one doing that
thing is doing. Finishing with one, finishing with some, finishing with
some other one is something any one doing any such thing is doing.
Finishing with one is one thing. Finishing with some is one thing.
Finishing with another one is another thing. Finishing with some other
ones is another thing. Finishing with the same ones is another thing.

Finishing with some one is what any one is doing who is one finishing
with some one. Finishing with some is what any one is doing who is one
finishing with some.

Finishing with some and remembering that thing is what some are doing
who are remembering everything. Finishing with some one and remembering
that thing is what some are doing when they are finishing with some one.
Finishing with some and not remembering that thing is what some are
doing who are remembering anything. Finishing with some one and not
remembering that thing is what some are doing who have finished with
some one.

Some one is finished with some one and that one is one who was one not
any one needed to be finished with as that one was one being one not
coming to any finishing. Finishing with such a one is what some one is
doing and that one then is knowing that thing and not any one then is
finishing any such thing. Being finished with some one is what has
happened to some one and that one is then one being one not having
finished anything as that thing is something that not any one can be
beginning to be finishing. Finishing with some one is something and that
finishing then is done. Finishing with some one is something some one is
beginning and that thing then is begun.

Liking something and being then one offering something is what some are
doing. Liking something and paying something then and not forgetting
anything then is what some are doing.

Some one is wanting to have some one come again. That one is not coming
again. Some are then remembering everything. Some are then wanting to be
certain that the one will perhaps come again.

Being one feeling that some one has come is what some are doing. Being
one feeling that that has been happening that some one has come and has
been looking is what some are doing.

Being finished with one and with another one and with another one is
what some are doing. Being finished with one is something. Being
finished with one and with another one and with another one and with
another one is something. Being finished with one, that is, being
finished with having been liking being needing one is something. Being
finished with one, that is, being finished with having been liking one
is something. Being finished with knowing one is something. Being
finished with one is something. Being finished with one and with another
one and with another one is something.

Being listening when some one is telling something one is liking is
something. Being finished with being listening when some one is telling
something one is liking is something. Being listening is something.
Having been listening is something. Having not been listening when some
one has not come to be talking is something. Having been listening when
some one has not come to be talking is something.

Some one, Sloan, listened and was hearing something. He went on then
beginning anything. Sloan had heard something. He did not hear that
thing again. He asked then, he asked if he would hear something like
that thing. He asked it again. He listened then. He did not hear that
thing. He began anything. He had expected to hear something. He did hear
something. He began anything.

Some one, Gibbons, did hear something. He almost always heard something.
He did say everything. He did know that he almost always heard
something. He did know that he said everything. He did know that it
almost sounded like something when he said everything. He did know that
thing. He did know he almost always heard something. He did know that
was something.

Johnson did not tell any one that he told everything. He told some that
he told something. He did tell something and he told any one that he had
told something, that he would tell something, that he was telling
something. He did tell some one that he could tell something. He did
tell some that he was telling something. He did listen, he did not tell
everything to any one of having been doing such a thing of having been
listening.

Hobart did not expect anything in being one listening. He was then
doing that thing and then he was regretting completely politely
regretting not having been able just then to quite complete that thing
to quite complete listening. He had been listening, he had not been
hearing everything, he had been hearing something, he was completely
pleased with that thing, with having then quite heard something. He was
completely polite then, completely pleasant then, completely then
satisfying any feeling of understanding being the one having heard
something then.

Carmine had quite listened then and remembered then something that was
not then something that was completely needing such remembering. He had
listened some, he had heard everything, he had remembered something and
that was not a thing to completely satisfy any desire for remembering he
could have been having. He remembered something. He quite remembered
that thing.

Watts looked in listening, he completely looked then. He listened and he
was looking, he was completing looking, he had completely looked then.
He could go on then completely looking.

Arthurs always listened and if he could then have remembered anything he
would then have been one being quite charming. He was pleasant, he had
charm, he was listening, he was expecting to be coming to be one
listening and hearing and remembering.

To be finished with any one is something. Some one is finished with some
one. Some one is finished with one.

Vrais is some one with whom some one is almost finished and that is not
surprising and that is not exciting although the one finished with him
is one who has said of him said of Vrais that he was a faithful one.
Vrais was a faithful one that is to say he was not always coming when he
might have been pleasantly coming to be being that one being a faithful
one but he was one who had come and had been then a faithful one and had
come again sometime and had been then a faithful one. The one who was
finishing then with him was one who had said that Vrais was a faithful
man.

That one was finished with Vrais that is to say Vrais was not needing
then to be one coming sometime to be then a faithful one. Vrais was not
needing then to be a faithful one for that one who had been one who had
said that Vrais was a faithful one. There were some then who were coming
and any one then coming was a faithful one and the one who had said that
Vrais was a faithful one was one then not finishing but finished with
him with his having been one sometimes coming and having been then a
faithful one. He had been one sometimes coming and had been a faithful
one and not one was finished with that thing. There were enough then
coming, all of them were enough then to be any one coming sometimes and
being a faithful one. Vrais was then one with whom some one was finished
then and not needing anything, not needing any one being a faithful one
in being coming sometimes, in being completely a faithful one in having
been coming sometimes.

Some one was finished with Jane Sands. Several were finished with Jane
Sands. Any one could come to be certain that she had not ever been a
dangerous person. Any one could come to be certain that she had not gone
on doing something. Any one could come to be certain that she had not
been meaning what she was living in meaning. Any one could come to be
certain that she had not been understanding anything. Any one could be
certain that she had not begun anything. Any one could come to be
certain that she was not feeling what she was one completely resonating.
Any one could be certain that she had been completely born and been a
stupid one. Any one could come to be enough finished with her to be
quite finished then quite finished then with her. Any one could come not
to be paying any attention to having been finished with, when they had
been for a little time finished with her. Any one then could be one
being finished with her. Any one could be such a one. Any one was some
time some such a one. Any one was one who was finished with her when
they were certain of anything of her everything.

Larr was one, almost any one could be certain not any one would be one
being completely finished with him. Not any one was completely finished
with him that is to say he was one who could be one with whom not any
one had been completely finished. One could be completely finished with
him and one was completely finished and he was one with whom not any one
was completely finished that is to say he was one who might be one with
whom not any one was finished. He was one with whom some were more
finished than they might have been if he had been one being more
completely one with whom not any one was completely finished. Some were
quite nearly enough finished with him so that for them they were
finished enough with him.

Mrs. Gaston was one who if she had been one not beginning being one not
going on being the one she had been would have been one whom not any one
would have been one feeling anything about finishing with her being
existing. She was beginning being one and that one was one repeating
what was not succeeding and some were certain that very many had come to
be remembering that finishing with her was existing. Any one could come
to remember something of finishing with her being something being
existing.

George Clifton said himself that any one wanting to know that he was one
some had come to be finished with should come to him, he could tell them
something of some such thing. He could tell them that not every one
could be finished with him, that he was finished with himself and that
was a thing that could have been something that was not happening and
certainly then he had been a healthy one and not needing everything and
having everything was something he had been having and he could be
having everything and he was not having everything and he was finished
enough with having everything and he was finished enough for any one who
was not wanting to be having him to be finished with him.

Loving is certain if one is going on loving. Loving then in a way is
certain. Loving is certain when one is going on loving.

Loving is certain. Going on loving is something when loving is certain.
Loving is certain and going on loving is something.

Some one being loving is going on loving. Some one being certain that
loving is something is going on loving. Some one going on loving is
certain that loving is something.

Some one loving is certain that that one is going on loving. Any loving
is certain and any one being certain is going on loving. Some one loving
is certain that going on loving is something.

Some are certain of going on loving as being existing. Some are
completely certain of going on loving being existing. Some are certain
about loving being about loving not being existing. Some are not certain
about loving being, about loving not being existing. Some are certain
about loving going on about loving not going on. Some are not certain
about loving going on, about loving, not going on.

Any one looking is loving, that is sometimes quite certain. Sometimes
any one looking and looking again is loving. Sometimes any one looking
is loving. That is something.

Any one looking is loving. Any one remembering that thing is remembering
anything. Any one looking is loving. Any one not remembering that thing
is not remembering that thing.

Any one remembering about looking and loving is mentioning anything and
resenting something. Any one looking is loving and any one is mentioning
anything, and any one is resenting something.

Any one resenting something is remembering that any one looking and
loving is looking and loving. Any one resenting something is mentioning
something. Any one mentioning anything is looking and loving.

Looking and loving is something. Remembering anything is something.
Mentioning anything is something. Resenting something is something.

Remembering that looking is loving is something. Remembering that any
one looking has been loving is something. Remembering that looking is
loving and not then mentioning that thing is something. Remembering that
looking is loving and being then mentioning that thing is something.

Having been one being one who had been looking is anything. Having been
one who had been looking and any one had then been mentioning that
looking is loving is anything. Having been one who had been looking and
having been then one being one not mentioning that looking is loving is
anything.

Having been one looking and being one then having mentioned that thing
and some one then having mentioned that looking is loving is anything.
Having been one looking and having been then one having been mentioning
looking and any one then mentioning that looking is loving is then
anything.

Having been looking and not loving, having been not looking and not
loving is everything. Having been not looking and not loving and having
been looking and not loving and having been looking and loving is
everything. Having been not looking and not loving is everything.

Having been looking and loving, and not looking and loving, and loving
and looking, and loving and remembering having been looking is
something. Having been not looking and loving is something. Having been
loving and not looking is something. Having been loving and looking is
something.

Each one is one. Each one looking is that one the one then looking. Each
one looking and loving is then that one the one looking then and loving.
Looking and loving is anything.

Some one, that one was one who was married to some one and he was one
whose name was Claudel and he was married to one and she and he knew
that thing knew that he was looking and loving. They were married the
two of them. They had been married and they had three children. They
were married and he had come to be looking and in a way then he was
loving. Mrs. Claudel knew then that he had been looking and in a way
then was loving. He was looking at one whom he had naturally been
looking at. He went on looking at her and some had been doing that thing
had been looking at her. She had been looking at any one and touching
every one and certainly then she was one not loving, not looking, she
was one touching any one and not looking and not loving. She was one
touching any one and telling every one that she was not looking and not
loving, that she was touching any one, that she was not looking at any
one, that she was not loving any one, and it was this thing that she was
doing, she was not looking, she was not loving, she might be touching
any one. He looked then and in some way then he was looking and loving
some then. She was not looking then, she was all loving then, she was
then being one who had not been looking, who was loving then, who was
quite touching any one then. She was then one going on loving and
leaving then. Mrs. Claudel then was continuing in being one married to
Mr. Claudel then. They were married then. They had been quite married,
they were quite married then.

Paymen knew all of them. He knew others too then. He knew that any one
looking and loving might be one refusing to be marrying.

Looking and loving and refusing to be marrying is something. Mayman was
being one knowing that looking and loving and refusing to be marrying is
something. He was looking and loving and refusing to be marrying.

He was looking and not loving. He was looking and seeing one, he was
looking and seeing Miss Hendry and he was not loving. He was looking and
he went on then looking and he was looking then. He was not loving, he
was not then refusing to be marrying. He was then looking and looking
then. He was not then looking and loving and refusing to be marrying. He
was looking then, he was looking at Miss Hendry then.

He was looking and loving he was looking and loving and he was loving
and he was looking and he was not then beginning to be refusing to be
marrying. He was looking then at Miss Damien. He was looking and loving.
He was looking. He was loving and looking. He was not being then being
one looking and loving and refusing to be marrying. He was loving then
and looking. He was loving then and not looking. He was looking then. He
was looking and loving then. He was not looking then. He was not looking
and loving then. He was not looking then at Miss Damien.

He was looking at Miss Lane then. He was not looking and loving then. He
was looking then. He was not looking at Miss Lane and loving her then.
He was not loving Miss Lane. He had been looking at Miss Lane.

He had been refusing to be marrying Miss Walting. He had been hoping to
be refusing to be marrying Miss Walting. He had not been needing to be
quite deciding to do that thing to be refusing to marry Miss Walting.

He had been looking at and not refusing to marry Minnie Claudel. He had
been looking at Minnie Claudel. He had not been refusing to marry
Minnie. He married Miss Walting.

He knew that Mr. Claudel had been looking and loving. He knew that Mr.
Claudel had come to doing that thing. He knew that looking and loving is
not anything. He quite knew that thing. He knew that Mrs. Claudel knew
that thing that looking and loving is not anything. Mr. Claudel had been
looking and loving. Any one could be one suffering.

Any one being one suffering can be one having been mentioning something
of some such thing. Any one being one suffering is one being one going
on then having been one mentioning something of some such thing. One,
Marie, had been mentioning that suffering was existing. She had been one
who had been mentioning that suffering is being existing.

In mentioning that suffering is being existing Marie was beginning the
completing of being one mentioning something. She was mentioning that
suffering is being existing. She was mentioning this thing. She had not
mentioned any such thing to Haick, she was not mentioning any such thing
to him. She had mentioned that suffering is being existing. He was not
one asking any one to remember being one mentioning that suffering is
being existing. He was not one mentioning to any one to mention to any
one that suffering is being existing. He was not mentioning to any one
to not mention to any one that suffering is being existing. He was not
mentioning to any one that suffering is being existing. He was not
mentioning to any one that any one was mentioning that suffering is
being existing. He was asking some one to tell him to whom Marie was
coming soon to marrying. That one was then not mentioning any one. He
and Marie then mentioned that he and she were going to marry each other
very soon and very soon then they did marry and they did have two
children, and Marie was married to him and he was married to Marie and
each of them were ones who were succeeding in being the ones they were
being in living, they were ones being married ones who were a family
then, a family succeeding quite succeeding in living.

Any one repeating that any one can come again is one repeating
something. Any one repeating that every one does come again is one
repeating anything.

One repeating that some one coming again is one who always will be
welcome is one repeating everything. One repeating that when some one
comes that one will be welcome is one repeating everything. One
repeating that any one coming is one being welcome is one repeating that
thing. One repeating that any one coming and saying that he has come
then is one who can be welcome, is one repeating being one who has been
saying that thing. One repeating that some one has said something and
was then one who was not welcome is one who is repeating everything.

One who has been coming and is one then not going on being one who is
welcome is one who is then not remembering that he would have been
coming if he had not been welcome if he had not then come to not coming.
This one was one who was not then welcome. This one was then one who had
not been coming.

One who had been telling something was then repeating that thing, the
thing he had been telling and when he was doing that thing repeating the
thing he had been telling he was being one who would be one remembering
that some one had been very sorry for him and that he had been
completely sorry then for that one and had completely been giving
himself to that one.

One who had been telling one who was married to him that she was
something was one who was telling some one who was married to another
one that he should be one going on being that one being one who was
needing something of being married to be one being living. The one
telling that thing was telling the wife of the other man that she was
one who was not needing anything to be one having been married to the
one to whom she was married. They were then not welcome the one and his
wife to the wife of the other one.

One who was married to some one was one who would be one married to some
other one. This was one who was one who came to be married to the other
one. Any one would be one then married to some other one.

When one is born and not remembering any one can be one having been one
who would have been one bathing that one if the one who was born then
and not remembering had not come to be one knowing that some one who had
been a very little one then was the one who had been bathing that one.
Knowing something and telling it again and again is a happy thing if the
two of them are then completely knowing that thing that knowing a thing
and telling it again and again is a very happy thing.

In beginning going on living any one is beginning, any one is not
beginning. In beginning going on living any one is going on living.

Any one is going on living. Any one in going on living is going on
living. Any one in going on living is certainly going on living. In
going on living any one is doing something, is doing going on living. In
going on living any one is going on beginning going on living. In
beginning going on living any one is going on doing that thing.

Going on living is what any one is doing. In going on living any one is
doing that thing is going on living.

One in going on living is doing that thing and in doing that thing is
one remembering that any one is going on living and is doing that thing.

In going on living, in doing that thing one is one doing something that
is happening so that going on living is continuing. In going on living
each one is doing enough to be one going on and be one going on living.

Each day is every day, that is to say, any day is that day. Any day is
that day that is to say if any day has been a day there will be another
day and that day will be that day.

Each day is a day. Any day is a day. Each day is a day. Each day and
each day is every day. Every day is a day.

Every day is a day and some day some will know that that day is the day
that is that day. Every day is a day and some are thinking what each one
is doing if a day is a day, if any day is a day, if every day is a day.
Some one is thinking about any one doing something, about every one
doing something, and about any day being a day. Some one is thinking
something of some doing something and any day being a day and every day
being a day.

If every day is a day and every one does something every day, every one
can be certain that each day is a day and some can be thinking about
what some are doing every day.

In each day being a day and in every day being a day and any day being a
day, in every day being a day any one being one going on being living in
each day being a day any one being one is being one doing that thing
being one having been one going on being living. In each day being a day
and any day is a day, any day being a day, in each day any one coming to
be one continuing being living is one having been one being living,
having been one going on being living.

Any day being a day, each one every day is being that one the one being
that one. In each day any one is being one. In each day any one being
one is being that one.

Any day being a day one being that one is one being that one then. Any
day being a day any one being then one and going on being that one is
one going on being that one.

Any day one being that one is one being that one. Any day is a day. Any
one being one is being that one. Any one going on being one is being
that one. Any day is a day. Every day is a day. Each day is a day. Each
one is one. Any one is one. Any one is the one that one is.

Each day being a day Nettie was telling that thing, was telling that any
day is a day, that every day is a day. Nettie telling that any day is a
day is telling that any day is a day. Nettie telling that again and
again is telling often that any day is a day.

Nettie telling that any day is a day is telling that any day being a
day, any day is a day. Nettie telling again and again that any day being
a day any day is a day is telling that again and telling it, telling it
that any day is a day.

George Clifton telling that a day is a day is telling it every day.
George telling that a day is a day is telling it every day, is telling
every day that a day is a day. George telling that any day is a day is
telling that every day has been a day. George telling every day that a
day is a day is telling every day that each day was a day. George
telling that each day was a day is telling it any day. George telling
that each day was a day is telling it every day, is telling it any day.
George is telling every day that each day was a day. George is telling
any day that any day is a day.

Any day is a day and a day, a day that is any day is a day. A day that
is a day is a day. Any day is a day and Elise was one being one and
every day was a day. Every day was a day, every day being a day every
day was a day Elise was being one. Elise being one every day, being that
one every day, Elise being that one any day was one, every day, doing
everything of being that one. Every day she was doing everything of
being that one.

In doing everything every day of being that one she was one every day
doing everything of being that one.

In doing everything every day, in doing everything of being that one she
was one running, that is she was one running when she was just coming to
be doing something of doing everything of being that one. She was every
day doing everything of being that one. She was one running any day, she
was one running every day. She was one running when she was just coming
to be doing something of everything and she was doing everything of
being that one every day, she was doing everything of being that one any
day.

Any day is a day. Every day is a day and any one not needing that day
just then is one not needing that any day is a day. Some one not needing
that every day is a day is one not needing that every day is a day. Some
one not coming to be wanting some day to be a day and having every day
being a day is some one coming sometime to be one remembering that every
day is a day, is one remembering any day that any day is a day.
Madeleine is one remembering any day that any day is a day. She is one
having been remembering any day that any day is a day.

In remembering that any day is a day, in remembering that thing some are
remembering that they are not going on being living. In remembering that
every day is a day some are remembering that they have been going on
living.

In remembering that a day is a day some are being one kind of a one. In
not remembering that a day is a day they are being that kind of a one.

Some are not remembering, some are remembering something about any day
being a day. Some are remembering that they have been remembering that
any day is a day.

In a day being a day, that is in each day being a day, that is in there
being one day and then being another day any one is one being one and
any one being one is one being that one. Any one being that one is one
who has been one going on being one all that day if that one had not
come sometime in that day to be a dead one.

Any one being one and any one is one, any one going on being one every
day is one being that one and any one being one is one being that one.

One being one and being living every day is one who would be one
deciding that going on being living another day would be a different
thing from being living that day if it were not the same thing. She was
one being one and every day in being that one she was not expecting to
be a different one. She was one and being that one she would be one
being one not liking the day as well as she had been liking some other
day if she had not been one who had not been one needing liking that
day. She was liking any day, that is to say she was not needing to be
not liking any day. She was liking any day, that is to say any day was a
day, every day would be a day, any day was a day, a day was a day, any
day was that day.

Some being certain that a day is a day and any one not being certain of
some thing about a day not being a day are certain that a day is a day,
any one being certain that a day is a day are certain that they will be
ones going on doing that thing, being certain that a day is a day.

One day, one man is saying to another man that they will go where they
have come from. Any day they can say, they do go where they were going.
Any day is a day. Any day they have been all day where they were all
day. Every day is a day. They can be certain that any day is a day. They
can be certain that a day is a day.

Mr. Peter was knowing that being one being of a kind who are ones
knowing that in a day, in any day they are winning some and losing a
little and sitting in doing this thing and inventing a little different
ways of going on sitting and telling some of being ones not needing
anything just then, Mr. Peter knowing a little of being one being such a
one is one knowing that in being that kind of a one he is one who could
be refusing what he might be buying if he was completely inventing
buying everything. Mr. Peter is one understanding that he is not
inventing each day buying everything. Mr. Peter is one understanding
that he is one inventing each day buying something. He is knowing he is
of a kind of a one not knowing he is that kind of a one. He is knowing
that he is that kind of a one. He is knowing that if any one wants any
one being that kind of a one, being that kind of a one is quite a good
thing.

Every day he is being that one and knowing that thing he is saying that
anything is a good thing and in a way being that kind of a one is a good
thing. He is saying this thing any day. He is believing some little
thing any day. He is inventing some little thing any day. He is sitting
and playing something every day.

Mrs. Peter is one remembering that being one being living where any one
who is polite is not mentioning everything they are seeing, Mrs. Peter
being one laughing and being one remembering having been laughing where
any one being a polite enough one is not remembering anything they were
seeing, Mrs. Peter being one having been one living where she had been
living was remembering that every day then she was laughing and was
remembering that any day then was a day she would not be living there if
she could come to be living elsewhere. She came to be living elsewhere.
Every day there she was one laughing and remembering. Every day there
she was one meeting some and remembering that she could come to
remembering everything she was seeing. Every day she was laughing and
any day some one was mentioning that she had not come to be remembering
everything she was seeing. Every day she was being that one.

Any day Flint could be one saying that he had said what he had been
saying. Any day Flint could be such a one. In diagramming anything Flint
could come to be certain that he had been a slow one. He was one and
being that one he was one seeing something. He was one and being that
one every day he was not seeing something. He was one and being that one
every day he was describing what he hoped he would not come to be
seeing. He was one and he was seeing something. He was one and he was
demanding that he could be mentioning what he was seeing. Every day he
was mentioning something he was seeing which was the thing he was
deciding not to be seeing. Every day he was mentioning that seeing
everything was something. Every day he was telling that be had been
seeing something and in being one seeing that thing he was one needing
to be one seeing some other thing. Every day he was seeing something.
Every day he was mentioning seeing something. Every day he was seeing
something and seeing that thing he was seeing that that thing was a
heavy thing, a dreary thing, a sad thing. Every day he was seeing
something. Every day he was seeing something and every day he was
mentioning that he was seeing something and it was a delicate, a
graceful, an impressive, a tender thing, the thing he was seeing. Every
day he was seeing something. Any day he was telling that he might come
to be seeing something and to be going on being one seeing that thing
and any day he was one being uncertain being uncertain of his being one
going to be seeing that thing.

Martin if he had not been one not coming very often would have been one
always asking if he might be one saying anything. He was one asking if
he might be one saying that he was going to be saying something.
Supposing every day was a day and every day he was asking very often if
he might be saying anything, supposing he was such a one and supposing
that he went on being that one, would he then be one not coming to be
one any one would want to be one saying something. If he was one asking
any day and very often if he might do something he would be the one who
had come to being one who might have known that he could do something if
he did not come to be one who was going on being one not coming to be
where he could do anything.

He was one and being one who every day was using all day in having that
day be that day, he was one and having come to be one he was one having
come to use every day to be a day and in doing that thing in making a
day be a day he was using up all of a day and he was then that one. He
was one then knowing all of that thing, knowing all of a day being a
day. He was then knowing something. He was then doing something. He was
then being that one.

George was one and being one and not polishing that thing because it
being a quite full thing and a fairly dull thing and a quite delicate
thing, polishing would be brightening, George being that one he was one
and any part of any day was a day to him and a day to him was a day and
in being that thing it was something and something was done and again
and again it would be finished and something could then be begun that
would be finished any day which was a part of a day for any part of a
day was a day when that part of a day was being there and being then a
day.

Maddalena had every day for being one being living and being one having
been using something for such a thing she was using any part of a day
that was needing using and she went on being one who had been one
keeping going being living. Every day then in a way was a day. Every day
was a day and many days were many days and all the days she had been
living were all the days she had been living. She was living every day
and being living every day that day was a day coming after the other
day. Any day was a day and she was doing that thing she was doing every
day to be a day and every day coming to be a day she had been living
that day. She lived every day, that is the day was a day and she was
living the next day and that day was a day. Any day was a day and
anything hurting any one that day was something hurting that day. Any
day was a day and any being sick that day was the being sick that day.
Any day was a day. Every day was a day. There were enough days as every
day was enough of a day.

Eugenia knowing that she was one needing to be one enjoying that she was
not exhausting having been living was one needing not to be completely
working, not completely not working every day. She was one arranging
having been that one. She was one being that one. She was one working,
she was one not working every day. She was one working, she was one not
working any day. Every day was a day.

She was one completing that each day she was quite showing that she was
one working and not working. She was completing every day quite neatly
every day that she was working, that she was not working every day.

She was arranging any day that every day was all of that day. She was
completing arranging every day that every day is a day. Every day is a
day. Any day is a day.

Being one remembering what being that one is meaning is something. Being
one intending to be completing being that one is something. Being one
conceiving that that one is that one is something. Completing
remembering that one has been conceiving that that one is that one is
something.

Any one being any one is being one that that one could be conceiving to
be that one. Any one being one is being one remembering that that one
could have been conceiving that that one could be that one.

If in having been one one was one then that one the one that one was was
one having come to be that one. In having been one one who was one was
one and in having been that one that one was one having come to be that
one. In having come to be that one one having come to be that one was
one coming to be that one.

One being one, being that one, is one and being one, having come to be
one, having come to be that one, is one and being that one is one and in
being that one is one keeping that thing keeping being that one. Any one
being one and keeping being that one is that one. Any one keeping to be
one is one and being that one is that one.

Minnie Harn was one, she had come to be that one. Miss Furr was one, she
had come to be that one, she was keeping being that one. Anne Helbing
had come to be one, to be keeping being that one. Minna had been coming
to be one. She was one. She had been keeping being that one.

Each one being one and coming to completing that thing is in being that
one remembering something of beginning completing that thing. Any one is
one completing being that one.

Paul was one and in being that one he was one being one remembering
having been coming to be that one and being one not needing doing that
thing not needing remembering coming to be that one because being that
one very many were expecting to be remembering his coming to be that
one. He was remembering coming to be that one and in remembering coming
to be that one he was choosing quite choosing to have been remembering
everything and having everything being having been what he was
remembering in remembering everything. He was one remembering everything
in having everything being having been what he was remembering as having
been in his coming to be being that one. Any one could remember that
thing could remember that he was one who had come to be that one. He was
the one remembering everything in having everything having been and he
being the one having come to be that one.

Having come to be that one he was one come to be one and some came to be
ones knowing that thing that he was one having come to be one not having
come to be that one.

He was one. In being that one he had been one. In having been one he was
one who had been one. In being one he was not one coming to be one. He
had not come to be one. He was not coming to be one. He had been one. He
was that one. He was one and he had been one. He had been one. In being
one he was one. He had been one. In having been one he had been one.

In being one he was one and in being one he was one and in being one he
was one. In being one he was one.

In having been one he had been one. He had been one. He was one. He had
been one. In being one he was one.

In being one he was one and in being one he was one. He had been one. In
having been one he had been one. In having been one he had been one.

In being one he was one. In being one he was one and in being one, in
being one he was one. He was one. He had been one. He had been one.

He was one. In being one he was one. He was one. He was one.

Arranging being one and any one not arranging being one is one not
arranging being one, in arranging being one any one arranging being one
is feeling something coming. In arranging being one any one is feeling
something doing. In arranging being one any one is having a piece of
them spreading. In arranging being one any one is beginning completing
something. In arranging being one any one is existing. In arranging
being one one is almost completing that thing.

In arranging being one one was completing that thing. In completing
being that one that one was one coming to be one having to remember that
he had arranged that thing. He came to be one not needing anything to be
that one but complete remembering that he had arranged that thing.

Mr. Hurr, it is natural that being one he is arranging that thing. It is
natural that arranging that thing and going on being that one and being
one who could be selling anything it is natural that he being that one
that Mrs. Hurr speaking to, speaking of him should speak of him as Mr.
Hurr and say then that that is a natural thing.

It was a natural thing that he being that one and satisfying that thing
it was a natural thing that in helping any one he was helping very many
and in helping very many he was helping some who had already been
succeeding and he was helping some who might not have been succeeding if
he had not been helping them and who were then ones a little succeeding
then. It was a natural thing the he being one he was not helping some
who were coming to be ones quite succeeding. He being one and being one
who could be selling anything, it was a natural thing that he was one
arranging to be one coming to be one working to have been one working
and feeling. He being one it was a natural thing that he was one and
being married then it was a natural thing that he and she were then ones
spending and economizing. They being ones being married then it was a
natural thing that he was understanding that some living that was a
living was a living having meaning. He being one feeling understanding
that some living being living having meaning it was a natural thing that
he was a man expressing dignity in suffering, he was a man expressing
women dreaming, he was a man expressing dim awakening, he was a man
expressing dim disappearing.

Any one arranging telling something was arranging something for that
thing, was arranging anything for that thing. Any one arranging anything
is arranging something.

In arranging anything, in arranging hoping to be one coming to expect
arranging to be existing, in arranging anything some one arranging
something is arranging that an arrangement is not completely existing.

Some one arranging something is arranging that having arranged that
thing it is necessary to arrange that that thing is something that being
arranged is not completing anything.

Some one arranging everything is arranging that something that will not
then come to be arranged is something that will be arranged when that
thing which is arranged is something that has been completely arranged
and completely begun being arranged.

Arranging something so that in disarranging that thing something will be
arranged is something. Arranging something so that some one arranging
something is arranging that thing is something.

Arranging anything and then arranging something in that arrangement and
then completing the arranging of some other thing is something.
Arranging something and then arranging that in arranging another thing
any arrangement is an arrangement is something.

Arranging something and then having something and then losing anything
and then arranging everything is something. Any one arranging is
arranging. Every one arranging is arranging. Any one believing that
arranging is something is believing that arranging is something.

Clay was arranging that he would be worrying if arranging everything
would be what he was needing. He was arranging that he would not be
worrying if in going on being living he would be losing being one
needing to be arranging everything.

He could be arranging that he would not arrange everything and he almost
did arrange this thing. He arranged almost everything. He went on almost
arranging everything.

Henns in arranging that he would go on arranging what he wanted to go on
arranging was arranging that he would begin to arrange something. He
began arranging that thing and then some one and he had asked him to
arrange with him came to arranging the thing with him. They arranged the
thing the the two of them. They arranged it and then Henns was
completely having it that he was one who had come to be one who would
arrange what any one telling many to arrange things was telling him to
arrange. He came to arrange things then. He went on arranging some such
things.

Arranging being one having a feeling of being one is something.
Arranging being one having a feeling of not being an important one is
something. Arranging being one having a feeling of being one admiring
being one succeeding is something. Arranging being one completely being
that one is something. Arranging being one continuing is something.
Arranging being one needing being one dreaming is something.

Dear Anne Helbing, she was that one, she remembered that thing, she
remembered having been that one. She remembered something, she
remembered that she had remembered being that one, she remembered that
thing, she remembered something.

Dear Anne Helbing, she was being that one, she was remembering
everything, she was remembering that thing. She had been that one and
that thing was something she was not wanting to be using, it was
something she was not needing, it was something she was not remembering,
it was something, she had been that one she was one, she was Anne
Helbing.

She was Anne Helbing, she was that one, she was working, she was
remembering that thing, she was learning anything, she was forgetting
everything, she was remembering nothing, she was Anne Helbing.

She was Anne Helbing and she was arranging that thing, she was arranging
being working, she was arranging hoping everything, she was arranging
doing something, she did something, she did something and her mother was
doing everything and her mother did anything and Anne Helbing was
working and she was remembering everything.

Minna was one and she married sometime and she had arranged to be one
not needing doing that thing, she had arranged to be one and she was
that one she had arranged to be one being a quiet one.

She had arranged to be one taking very much time to be a quiet one. She
had arranged that she should be one having everything and she arranged
to be one being a quiet one. In being a quiet one she was arranging to
be one coming to be a married one. In being a quiet one she was
arranging being one having everything in having time to be one being a
quiet one.

She was arranging something she was arranging that a very long time she
would be arranging to be a married one. She was arranging something she
was arranging that all the time she would be a quiet one. She was
arranging something she was arranging that being a quiet one she would
be one having what she was needing to be that one.

Any one having been coming and having been coming once and some one
having been remembering that thing, any one being one coming and being
one listening and being one coming to be quite old enough to be one
having been coming and having been is one being one coming again and
coming again is one telling that coming again is a pleasant thing, a
profitable thing and a thing that that one will be doing again. That one
will then be doing that thing again if that one has not come before then
to be a quite older one.

Thomas Whitehead is one and being one is one who sometime will be a
quite old one and having come then to be a quite old one will be one who
has been one coming and telling that coming again would be a pleasant
thing and then have come again and have been telling that it was a
pleasant, a profitable thing to have come and that he will be one coming
again and he would be one coming again if he came again before he became
a quite quite old one.

Any one listening and hearing anything is one having been saying
something. Any one listening and telling that thing is one needing
something. Any one listening and hearing everything is one having been
one not needing telling anything. Any one listening and telling
everything is one being one who has been hearing something. Any one
being one having been hearing something is one being one not having been
needing all of that thing. Any one being one going on hearing something
is one who has come to be one telling something of that thing. Any one
hearing what he has been hearing is one telling what he has been
telling.

Clellan telling and Clellan hearing is Clellan not having been one
needing to be hearing and telling. Clellan telling is Clellan not
completing needing to be telling. Clellan hearing is Clellan not
completing needing to be hearing.

Clellan being is being not needing to be hearing. Clellan being in being
not needing to be telling, Clellan hearing is Clellan being hearing.
Clellan telling is Clellan being telling. Clellan hearing is Clellan.
Clellan telling is Clellan.

Clellan being is being not completely needing to be being. Clellan being
is being one completely going on being. Clellan being is being in being
one being Clellan. Being Clellan is being being one. Being Clellan is
being being that one. Being Clellan is one completely going on being
being one. Being Clellan is being one hearing, telling completely going
on being, being one telling and hearing and being Clellan. Being Clellan
is being Clellan. Being Clellan is being one.

Being Clellan and being one, being Clellan and being hearing, being
Clellan and being telling, being Clellan and going on being, being
Clellan and not being one not being Clellan, being Clellan and quite
being Clellan, being Clellan and being Clellan and completely quite
going on being Clellan is being Clellan.

Being Clellan and being and doing and hearing and telling and being
quite completing needing and being Clellan and being that Clellan and
being going on being that Clellan is being Clellan.

Being Clellan is being that Clellan. Being that Clellan is being
Clellan.

Little ones being ones any one is being one. Little ones having been
ones every one is being one. A little one being one any one is needing
then that every one is any one. A little one being one any one is
needing then that any one is every one. A little one being one some one
is some one being one coming later. A little one being one some are ones
being ones coming to not coming often. A little one being one some are
ones deciding everything. A little one being one that one is one and
that one being one every one is one and every one being one some one is
some one and some one being some one some one is going. Some one going
some other one is coming. Some other one coming every one is changing.
Every one changing any one is directing. Any one directing every one is
mentioning everything. Every one mentioning everything any one is coming
again. Any one coming again, some one has been coming. Some one having
been coming every one is leaving. Every one leaving every one will come
again. Every one coming again, some one will have been. Some one having
been, some one will be coming. Some one coming, every one is staying.
Every one staying each one is explaining. Each one explaining, every one
is listening. Every one listening, each one is being.

Murdock being one is one who if he were one explaining would be
explaining that he was not doing what he would be doing if he were doing
what he would be doing if he were one doing what he was being one being
doing. Murdock might be one explaining. Murdock was one being one.

Nantine if he were a sadder one would be a lonely one in explaining that
thing. Nantine in being a sad enough one was almost a lonely one in
telling anything. Nantine in being a lonely one was being one not
completing that thing in explaining that being that one was being one
having been keeping going living.

He was being one and seeing any one, and seeing any one he was putting
down something, and putting down something he was reproducing anything,
and reproducing anything it was looking like that one, and looking like
that one it was being something that some one being one seeing what was
being was putting down in being one who was one not being a lonely one
because he was being one seeing what was what any one was seeing.

He was being one not being a lonely one because he was putting down what
every one was seeing. He was one almost being a lonely one because he
was seeing what he was putting down. He was one being a sad one because
he was one being almost a lonely one. He was one being a sad one and he
was one not being a sad enough one to be one not going on being one
asking any one to be one asking him to be one going on being living.

In putting down anything any one putting down something is that one, one
putting down something. In putting down something if something is put
down then that which is put down is something. If that which is put down
is something then that thing is what it is and being what it is it is
something and being something any one being any one is being one and
being one is one and any one is one and then any one is one and anything
having been put down is a thing and that thing is a thing and anything
is something.

Anything having been put down and being down and any one being one and
anything having been put down being something and any one being one
being one, then anything being put down and being something and any one
being one being one then, anything being something is something and any
one being one is one. Any one being one is one. Anything being put down
is something. Anything being put down being something and anything that
is something is being that thing, then that thing is a thing and any one
is any one. Any one being one being one then any one is one being one
and being one anything that is put down is something.

Any one being one is one. Anything put down is something. Anything being
down is something and being that thing it is something and being
something it is a thing and being a thing it is not anything and not
being anything it is everything and being that thing it is a thing and
being that thing it is that thing. Being that thing it is that thing and
being that thing it is coming to be a thing having been that thing and
coming to be a thing having been that thing it is a thing being a thing
it is a thing being that thing.

A thing being a thing that is that thing, a thing being a thing, a thing
having been put down a thing being something and putting down a thing is
a thing that is happening and then the thing put down being then that
thing, a thing being that thing, a thing is something and a thing being
something, a thing being that thing is then that thing and being then
that thing it is a thing and being a thing it is that thing and it is
then that thing, it is then that thing.

A thing being that thing, they are many things. There are many things.
Each thing is that thing.

Any one being one is that one. One being one and being that one and
going on being is going on being that one. In going on being that one he
is one going on being one.

Lamson is one. He is one. He is that one. He is one going on being that
one. He is that one in going on being one. In going on being one he is
being that one. He is that one.

Lamson is being one. He is one. He is one and he is one who is one. He
is one. He is experiencing something. He has not been experiencing
everything. He has not been experiencing being that one. He has been
experiencing being that one. He has not been experiencing everything.

He is one who is one. He is one being one. He is one going on being one.
He is one going on being that one.

In going on being that one he is going on experiencing being that one.
He is not experiencing being that one. Being that one is something that
he is not going on experiencing. He is not experiencing being that one.
Experiencing being that one is not existing.

Experiencing being that one not being existing he is not experiencing
being that one. He is going on being that one. Experiencing being that
one is not coming to be something being existing.

In not experiencing being that one that one is one being that one and
being one going on being that one and being one being that one in being
that one. In being that one, in experiencing being that one not being
existing that one is one being one is one going on being one, is one
being that one is one going on being that one, is one being in being
one.

If, and if not then it is not, if something is and some one being
certain is denying it then, if something is and some one being certain
is not telling that the other one is not seeing what is in denying that
it is, if some one being certain is not certain then something that is
is what it is and if it is what it is then being what it is is what is
interesting to some one interested in that thing. If some one hearing
something is not saying anything and hearing that thing is certain that
something is not anything then if that thing is something that one is
one who is certain that that thing is not anything. If that one is quite
certain that that thing is not anything and is going on being certain
and if that thing is something then that one being certain that that
thing is not anything is one who would be an important one if that thing
is something. That one being an important one and being certain that
that thing is not anything he is one going on being an important one and
going on being an important one he is one coming to be certain that if
that thing is anything then it is something.

Being certain that something is something is an important thing to some
one. Being certain that something is not anything is an important thing.
Being certain that it is an important thing to be certain that something
is not something is an important thing.

Something being something and some one seeing everything and some one
seeing anything and any one knowing that it is an important thing that
something being something some one is seeing every thing, some one is
seeing anything, some one is an important one. Some one being an
important one anything is something. Anything being something some one
is seeing anything.

Some one seeing anything some other one is seeing anything. That one
seeing everything is always right in judging. That one always being
right in judging some one is always believing something.

Something and anything being what is being then anything coming is what
some one has been intending and some one having been intending something
something that is something is what any one is seeing. Any one seeing is
saying something unless they are not saying anything. If they are saying
something they are saying that something is not anything, if they are
not saying anything they are not saying anything. If they are saying
that something is not anything they are then saying that anything is
something.

One feels something about depression. One feels something. That one
feels something and that one feels something about some one's liking
about some one's not liking something that one has been continuing. Some
one feels something about something that one knows about and has been
neglecting.

What is that one feeling that one who is feeling something in feeling
something about that one being a sad one. That one is feeling something
in feeling that being a sad one is what that one is then. That one being
one and feeling something is feeling something about any one feeling
something about what that one has been doing. That one who is one and
feeling something is feeling something about something that one knew and
has been neglecting.

That one feeling something, that one hearing something is knowing that
that one has been knowing something and having been neglecting that
thing something that one has been knowing is something that that one in
telling everything has not been using.

In telling everything and any one telling everything is doing something,
in telling everything any one neglecting something is knowing that in
feeling everything they are needing that thing. In feeling everything
any one feeling everything is doing something. In feeling everything
every one explaining everything is knowing something that that one has
been neglecting.

Every one explaining everything is doing something. Every one feeling
everything is doing something. Every one telling everything is doing
something.

Any one doing something is knowing that they are knowing something they
are neglecting. Every one knowing something they are neglecting is doing
something.

Miss Harvey admiring Wilbur is doing that thing quite doing that thing
quite admiring Wilbur. In admiring Wilbur she is not knowing anything
she is neglecting. In admiring Wilbur she is telling that Wilbur is not
knowing anything he is neglecting. In admiring Wilbur she is doing that
thing she is admiring Wilbur. In admiring Wilbur she is admiring some
one and in admiring some one she is admiring Wilbur In admiring Wilbur
who is a young one she is not knowing anything she is neglecting, she is
knowing Wilbur is a young one she is not neglecting that thing. In not
neglecting knowing that Wilbur is a young one she is admiring Wilbur and
in admiring Wilbur she is telling everything, she is telling that Wilbur
is knowing what he is knowing and not neglecting that thing. In admiring
Wilbur she is not neglecting anything she is knowing, she is knowing
that Wilbur having been a young one and coming to be knowing something
was not neglecting coming to be knowing that thing. In admiring Wilbur
she was not neglecting anything she was knowing, she was knowing that
having been admiring Wilbur she had been admiring Wilbur.

In admiring Wilbur she was being one completing knowing everything and
not neglecting anything. In knowing Wilbur she was telling anything of
that thing anything of knowing everything and not neglecting anything.
In admiring Wilbur she was admiring everything of knowing everything and
not neglecting anything.

If Clellan had been impatient and any one being one who is one not being
considerate might be one being impatient if Clellan had been one being
impatient he would have been quite an impatient one. He was not an
impatient one. He was not at all such a one. Being one and not being an
impatient one is being one who is not an impatient one.

One not being an impatient one may be one who is feeling something about
something that one is doing in being one doing something. It is
certain, certainly it is certain that being one doing something in being
one one may be one who is an impatient one, one may be one who is not an
impatient one. If one is one who is not an impatient one in being that
one one may be one going on not being an impatient one. If one is an
impatient one in being one being one doing something one may be one
going on being one being an impatient one.

Any one being one and being one doing something in being one is one and
being one that one might be one who was one who in doing something was
doing that thing with a feeling that if he went on being one he would
come to be one expecting some to be accepting that he was one doing
something. Any one who might be such a one might come to not going on
being one. Any one being one and feeling something about being one doing
something is one who if that one were one going on doing something might
be one coming to be feeling something about any one accepting about any
one not accepting that he was one doing something. Any one being one and
very many are being ones, any one being one and feeling anything and
expecting to be feeling something is one who might come to be one
feeling that that one had been feeling something.

A big one a very big one and a little one being together another one an
appreciative one one looking to be accepting enjoying entering into
admiring, the three of them being every day all three of them telling
anything some one meeting one of them is remembering that any one doing
anything could be discouraging in laughing at every one and being
discouraging any one being a nervous one would be one being a depressed
one when that one was one having been sitting listening.

Some who would be ones succeeding would be ones failing if some one who
would have been one succeeding if he had been the one to be succeeding
had not been one deciding to be going on and being then succeeding. Some
who are ones succeeding are ones succeeding and being ones succeeding
they are the ones the very ones the ones succeeding.

Some who having been ones the ones succeeding, being ones are ones and
they are the ones who were the ones succeeding. They are the ones who
were the ones succeeding, they are the ones and they are succeeding in
seeing each other one being the one the one succeeding. They are the
ones the ones who were succeeding. They are the ones the ones seeing
each other one and looking each other one coming is succeeding and
succeeding they are the ones who were succeeding.

One being one not asking because if he were asking he would be wanting
to hear the answer that he was hearing, one being one not asking is one
asking some one what some were answering to asking he would have been
asking if he had been one being asking. He being one not asking he was
one being one who being one freeing what he was completing he being that
one and controlling that thing controlling having been one who was
completing something that one was one who in freeing everything was one
needing to be asking and asking he was one being one going on being a
very nervous one. He being one being that one and going on remembering
that he was being one he was one who if he went on being one would go on
being one who had been freeing what every one would be freeing if
freeing was not something that they freeing that thing were not freeing.
He was one and he was that one and being that one he was sitting and
sitting he was not resting and not resting he was changing and changing
he was struggling and struggling he was being lost and being lost he was
asking if some one finding him would be remembering that he had been
found.

Vrais says good good, excellent. Vrais listens and when he listens he
says good good, excellent. Vrais listens and he being Vrais when he has
listened he says good good, excellent.

Vrais listens, he being Vrais, he listens.

Anything is two things. Vrais was nicely faithful. He had been nicely
faithful. Anything is two things.

He had been nicely faithful. In being one he was one who had he been one
continuing would not have been one continuing being nicely faithful. He
was one continuing, he was not continuing to be nicely faithful. In
continuing he was being one being the one who was saying good good,
excellent but in continuing he was needing that he was believing that he
was aspiring to be one continuing to be able to be saying good good,
excellent. He had been one saying good good, excellent. He had been that
one.

Boncinelli in being one was the one explaining that he knew what he was
saying. He did know what he was saying. He did know that knowing what
one is saying is something having meaning.

Boncinelli in feeling was feeling that he was living. He was living. He
was feeling.

He was feeling, being feeling he could be one making something, and
having completely arranged that thing the thing he was making he was one
knowing that knowing that he was arranging what he had been making is
something. Knowing that knowing he was arranging what he is arranging
is something he was one knowing that he was living. In knowing that he
was living he was knowing that he was feeling. He was feeling and
knowing that he was feeling he was knowing that he was arranging what he
was feeling in what he had arranged in making the thing he knew he had
beeen arranging. He was feeling.

Why do you mind if you heard one thing and told something once and did
not believe anything and denied everything, why do you mind if you
continue something and admit everything and upset something and remember
everything, why do you mind if you repeat something. Why do you mind if
you destroy nothing, if you arrange everything, if you continue
anything, why do you mind if you admit something. Why do you mind if you
believe anything, if you admit everything, if you hear something why do
you mind if you do not remember everything. Why do you mind if you
remember something, if you like anything, if you resist something, why
do you mind if you do not forget everything. Why do you mind if you do
not resist anything, if you believe something, if you do not forget
anything, if you like everything, why do you mind if you remember
something.

Mr. Peter in saying something was saying that he was understanding
something by knowing that he had heard before what he was then hearing.
Mr. Peter was often hearing what he had not heard before. Mr. Peter was
not always understanding something. Mr. Peter was saying that he being
one who was hearing was one who was saying that if he could have been
one suffering he would have been one suffering in having been hearing
what he was not understanding. Mr. Peter was saying that he was one who
could be suffering. Mr. Peter was saying that he was one who was not
suffering. Mr. Peter was hearing what he would not have been
understanding even if he had heard it before and he had not heard it
before. Mr. Peter was saying that he was not understanding it because he
had not heard it before but he would not be understanding it if he had
heard it before. Mr. Peter was saying that he might not come to be
understanding what he was hearing. Mr. Peter was saying that he was not
suffering.

Mrs. Peter was saying that having gone where she had gone she would not
go again. Mrs. Peter was saying that in not going again she was deciding
that going again was a foolish thing when one did not like it when one
had been. Mrs. Peter might go again if she went with some one and Mrs.
Peter said she might go with some one but Mrs. Peter said that she would
very likely not go again as she very likely would not be going there
with any one. Mrs. Peter had been. Mrs. Peter was not going again.

If in going on there is beginning and if in beginning any one is certain
and if in being certain one is certainly needing to be able to believe
anything in order to believe what certainly is certain, if there is
continuing then certainly there has been enough said when in arranging
to be certain one has said very often that which it is certain that one
is believing.

One was, not certain, but one was, not believing, but one was having
what was existing. In having what was existing one was being enjoying
agreeing with the one who was saying who was saying often, often saying
somethings. In that one saying somethings if these things were the
things that were certain then in that one saying those things some one
enjoying living in agreeing in saying those things was saying things
that were certain. That one then being one coming to be certain was
certain about those things having been, having not been certain. Any one
being such a one and feeling anything is one feeling something. In one
feeling something there is certain to be something that in being
discouraging is not saddening. In not being saddening that thing having
been something is something but some other thing which is something is
everything and being everything is something. In being something that
thing is then encouraging.

Why if some one is enough that thing to be that one why is that one, in
being one being inside in that one, completely that one, why is that one
then being one who in being one is being so little that one that that
one is then another kind of a one. Why is that one being one who in
being one is one who would be expressing being that one if that one were
not one who in expressing being one is not expressing being that one.
Clellan is being one. Any one being one is being one. Clellan is being
one. In being one he is one, he certainly is one and in certainly being
one he is doing something and in doing something he is expressing being
one and in expressing being one he is not expressing being that one. In
not expressing being that one he is one expressing being completely
something. In expressing being completely something he is not expressing
being that one. In expressing being completely one he is hardly
expressing anything. In hardly expressing anything he is being one. In
being that one he is one who is not being the one he is being. In not
being the one he is being he is being what he would not be being if he
were being anything and he is being something he is being something that
would be something if it were anything but not being something it is not
anything. Clellan is one, when he is that one he is one. When he is not
that one he is completely expressing ing something. When he is
completely expressing something he is not expressing being that one.
When he is not expressing being that one he is not expressing anything.
He is that one. Clellan is one.

In doing anything if ones are knowing that if they are telling that they
have not a reason for doing the thing some will be knowing that they are
ones not deeply thinking, then they can say anything. In being ones who
can say anything they can be ones knowing that they are deeply thinking.
In being ones knowing that they are deeply thinking they can be ones
being certain that thinking deeply is not meaning anything.

In being ones who can say anything they are ones who are knowing that if
giving a reason is meaning something they are ones who have not given a
reason. In being ones who have not given a reason they are ones knowing
that some who have given a reason are ones who can be certain that they
certainly have it to be ones deeply thinking.

In doing anything and giving a reason one can be doing the two things
and one can be deeply thinking. In being one deeply thinking one can be
one giving a reason. In being one giving a reason one can be one doing
something. In doing something one can be one deeply thinking. In deeply
thinking one can be one hearing that some are not giving any reason.

Expect to be right and you are right if you complete everything. That is
something that any one reasoning is expecting and any one reasoning is
one being one not needing expectation.

In not needing expectation one is being one completing something and
completing anything is anything.

This is something. This and everything is something and all of
everything is what any one deciding everything is expecting. In
expecting all of that thing that one not needing expectation is
beginning again completing everything. In completing everything
beginning and ending has no meaning and why should beginning and ending
have meaning if everything is something. Why should they have meaning if
deciding anything is what any one is doing.

Some are deciding something. In deciding they are not expecting and in
not expecting they are attending to being ones arranging everything if
everything being arranged anything is happening. But nothing is
happening because if anything were happening beginning and ending would
be having meaning and if beginning and ending did have meaning then not
anything would be something any one was deciding and if not any one was
deciding anything then every one would be expecting something and if
every one were being ones being expecting then not any one would be one
doing reasoning and if not any one was one reasoning then not any one
would be one completing everything. This is that thing.

Hearing and not answering, hearing and answering something, telling
little things and telling too much then, making suggestions and not
making the whole of any one of them, changing before completely
beginning to tell that something is like some other thing, remembering
that if one were telling something some one would be answering,
forgetting that laughing is annoying, remembering that forgetting is
annoying, explaining that beginning anything is what is not happening,
denying that every one said something, telling some little thing that
some one might have said, explaining that if anything was said it was a
thing that being something was something that not any one could have
said, all this is something. When all this is something and all this is
always something, when all this is something then some one being certain
that something is existing is certain that all this is existing. When
that one is certain that all this is existing then that one explaining
everything will be explaining that all this being something anything is
something and anything being something something is existing and
something being existing anything is existing and anything being
existing everything is expressing that thing.

Some are some who being some and remembering something of that thing
come to be some who are existing in being some who are being remembering
that having been and being something they are being and being something.
They are some and going on they can tell everything they can tell that
telling everything is telling what they are in being some who are being
some who are something. Yes they are telling that thing. Certainly they
are telling that thing. Why should they not tell that thing when they
are ones being ones who being existing in being ones who are something
are ones who in telling that thing are telling everything. They are then
they are telling everything, they are telling that they are some who are
something. They are some and they are coming to be the ones who being
existing are the ones any one listening will be hearing telling
everything. In telling that they are some they are telling everything.
In telling everything they are ones having it continuing that every
thing is existing. They are all some who are something. They are telling
that thing. That is everything.

Any one remembering something is one who might not have been doing that
thing doing the thing that one is remembering having been doing. Any
one doing anything is one who may be one not remembering the thing that
one was doing. In being one tumbling some one may be one who might have
been tumbling if that one had been one who was running. That one was
tumbling that one had been one who commenced to be one commencing to
run. In being that one that one was one tumbling. In being one tumbling
any one could be one picking up that one. In any one picking up that one
some were certain that that one could have been one tumbling. In picking
up that one some were certain that that one was one who would not be
tumbling. In picking up that one some were remembering that picking up
some one was something that they might not be doing. In picking up that
one some were expecting that if they were picking up any one again it
would not be that one.

In doing something some who could be ones being gay ones are ones
remembering that they are then being ones who are not gay ones. In doing
something some who are ones who could be ones doing that thing are
remembering that they are not ones to do that thing they certainly are
not ones to do that thing then. In being ones who certainly are not ones
to do that thing then they are ones coming to be knowing that any one
who comes to be one doing that thing comes to be one who can be doing
that thing. Any one doing anything can come to be one who can be doing
that thing. A person who is visiting and who is uncomfortable can be
more uncomfortable before that visiting is over. A person who is
visiting and is not comfortable can go on being not comfortable through
the whole of the visit and can then visit again and not be comfortable
again. One who is visiting is one who if any one is asking that one to
visit them is one who visiting is not comfortable and will be more
uncomfortable. Any one being visited is one doing something and being
one doing something is one doing anything. Doing anything is doing
everything. Doing everything is something.

Any one took some one somewhere and having taken them they left them.
Any one going anywhere is one going and being going any one who is
knowing that thing knowing that some one is going is one who is one
knowing something.

Some came in. Some were there. Two came in. Two had been there. The two
who had been there were there. The two who came in were there. There
were four there.

The four there the two who came in and the two who had been there the
four there were all then there and being there they did not stay there.
The two who came in did not stay there, they left and the two who had
been there were the two who were there.

The two who were there were angry there and being angry they were left
there. Being left there one of them was angry, the other one was not
angry. The one that was angry was sitting. The one that was not angry
was resting. The two were there, one was angry and the other could have
known that, if that one had not been resting. The one that was angry was
angry because if being that one was something then being angry was
nothing. The one that was angry was angry and being angry was not
suffering and not being suffering was not having that being angry was
being what that one was being in being that one when being that one was
nothing.

That one was one who had been one being one who was not an angry one. In
being that one in being one who had been one not being an angry one that
one was not being one. That one was that one, that one was being then
one who was resting and there being then two of them and both resting
they were not being then there the two of them. One of them was there
then. That one was resting.

In a thing being one way and having come to be another way, in a thing
having come to be another way some one can be one trying to be telling
something. In trying to be telling something that one can come to be
saying something and some one asking something then that one is one then
wishing anything. In being one then wishing anything and that one then
is one wishing anything, in being one then wishing anything that one is
not then one wishing that the thing that is a changed thing is the thing
it was before that was a changed thing. That one is one wishing
anything, in wishing anything that one is not wishing that thing. And
why is that one in wishing anything not wishing that thing. That one in
wishing anything is not wishing that thing because that one in wishing
anything is wishing that some other one would be one knowing that the
thing is a changed thing. In wishing that the other one were one knowing
that the thing is a changed thing that one is one wishing anything
rather than that the other should be one being one knowing that thing
knowing that the thing is a changed thing. The one wishing would be one
wishing if that one were not one quite knowing everything of what would
be happening if the other one were knowing that the thing is a changed
thing. Wishing anything is wishing anything. Knowing everything that
will be happening is knowing everything that will be happening. Some one
who is knowing everything that will be happening is wishing anything.

You agree, I agree, we agree. If we agree and we do not agree, if we
agree and both say something then I say I do not agree and you say you
do not agree. If we both say something and you say I agree and I say I
do not agree then if we agree we agree that you agree and if you agree
that you agree then I agree that I then do not agree. Some agree, some
do not agree. That is something that any one saying any other thing is
saying is not happening. We agree, that is something that some say is
not happening. We agree that is something you are saying. In saying that
thing you are saying that thing and I am not saying anything. In not
saying anything I am saying that agreeing is nothing, any one saying
anything is agreeing, any one saying anything is not agreeing.

Some when they are talking are saying that they are not only saying that
thing, they are saying anything and in saying anything they are saying
that everything is nothing. In saying that thing they are saying that
they are hoping that if any one is answering them they will then not
need to answer again and they do answer again and then they are hoping
again that they will not need to be answering if any one says anything.
Any one answering can be one hoping that they will not be one expecting
to be answering again. Any one answering can be such a one.

If very many who come and say yes had come and said no, not any one who
was liking that many come and say yes would have been liking what was
happening. Very many who would not have been liking what was happening
if very many had come and said no did like what was happening as very
many came and said yes.

All who came and said yes said that they said yes and some of them said
that they had intended to say no and they would have said no if they had
not said yes. Having said yes they said that having said yes they would
say yes again if they did not say no.

One being one who had said no said that having said no he was saying yes
and saying yes he was saying that he would come to say no if he would
not come to say yes. This one was saying that he was not waiting to say
no. This one was saying that he was not waiting to say yes. This one was
saying that he would come to say no if he came to say no. This one was
saying that he would come to say yes if he came to say yes. This one was
asking if some one who had said yes had not said no. This one was saying
that one who had said no had said no.

This one was waiting and waiting was not waiting to say no was not
waiting to say yes. He was not waiting for any one to say no for any one
to say yes. He was not waiting for every one to say no, for every one to
say yes, this one was waiting and in waiting he said that he had said
yes if he had not said no. This one was waiting and in waiting he asked
any one what they had said whether they had said no, whether they had
said yes.

In talking and any one who was not listening was talking, in talking
every one who was not remembering what they were saying and not any one
can be one remembering that thing remembering what they were saying, in
talking every one in saying something is saying that something is not
anything and in saying that something is not anything is saying that
something might be something. Any one talking and any one who is not
talking and listening is talking, any one talking is remembering that
something that was said was something that being said was meaning that
something is something. Any one talking is one remembering something of
something. Any one talking is telling that something having been
something, something is something.

In being one not expecting that one will be taking what one will not be
taking, in being such a one one is one and one being one one can be that
one and when one can be that one and is that one then that one is the
one who can be that one and is that one and being that one then one is
being that one and being that one reducing and increasing is existing
and reducing and increasing being existing that one is that one and that
one being that one reducing is reducing and increasing is increasing.

Reducing being reducing and increasing being increasing everything is
something and everything being something anything is the thing that will
not be some other thing. This is all of that thing and this being all of
that thing something is all of something and something being all of
something reducing and increasing are being existing.

Continuing and having been destroyed then and continuing and not having
been destroyed then are two things that are happening. These two things
being things that are happening enough is happening to encourage any one
who is being encouraged then and to discourage any one who is being
discouraged then. In continuing and some continuing are telling that
that thing has been happening, in continuing some are destroyed and some
are telling that that thing has been happening. Some in telling that
thing are telling everything and in telling everything are telling that
travelling is not fatiguing, that travelling has been a dangerous thing,
that travelling is happening.

In bringing back inside in one what one can not have again inside in one
one can be one being certain that if one could have again inside in one
what one is not having again inside in one one would believe anything
and in believing everything would not be telling any one anything.
Alright, tell it again and tell it again and again and again and tell
something, why not tell something if in telling any one is telling it
again and again and again.

Wente was one who could remember that he was small enough to tell a
thing he would not be telling again and again and again if he were
bigger. He knew he was not bigger and being smaller he was not small
enough to forget that he was one who was not so small that anything
could worry him that did not worry him. Almost anything that worried him
worried him enough so that in telling that he was worrying he was
telling it again and again. In telling that he was worrying he was
telling that being the one he was he would not be telling any more of
anything that was worrying than that that worrying him he was one who
was worrying. In being that one and he was worrying, in being that one
he was one who would certainly be frightened if he worried enough and
not at all frightened if he was having worry him anything that was
worrying him.

He said that thing, he said that he said anything in saying that thing
and he did say anything in saying that thing and he said that again to
any one.

He said a little thing and he said he would be worrying if he were not
the one who was one worrying. He said he was not worrying again. He said
that he could say all of that thing. He said he did say that thing and
he would say another thing and he did say that other thing and he said
he was not worrying, and he was not worrying, he was not worrying again.
He was worrying and in being worrying he came again and again in being
that one to that thing the thing he had not been telling again and
again. He was not smaller than he had been, he was the size he had been,
he was not worrying about any such thing.

If every one was not believing that every one was believing that living
is continuing and any one can come to be a dead one, if every one was
not believing enough of this thing then any one doing anything would be
doing something of what they are doing. In doing something of what they
are doing any one doing something is doing what that one is doing.

Any one can be one telling something of some such a thing of any one
doing something in not believing anything of living being continuing.

Enough being done by any one doing something, doing something of that
thing so that any one beliving that any one can be a dead one is
believing that every one could be believing that living is not
continuing. Living is continuing if any one who can come to be a dead
one can come to be a dead one. Living can be continuing if every one
believing that every one is not believing that living is continuing, is
believing that any one can come to be a dead one.

It is not a thing that is comforting to be certain that any one
listening is one who can not be convinced that the one talking is really
explaining what is being really explained by that one. The one talking
is explaining what is really being explained by that one. The one
listening can not be certain that the one talking is really explaining
what is being explained by that one. It is not comforting to be one
being living. It is not comforting to be one not being living. Nothing
is comforting if one is being comforted by something. Nothing is
comforting if one could be comforted by anything. Nothing is comforting.
Not any thing is comforting and anybody being living can be being living
and anybody not being living can be not being living.

He said something and understood that any one understanding that thing
could say something of that thing. He said something and understood that
any one understanding that thing could say that he had not said what he
had said when he had said that thing. This is something.

If some one wants something and not having that thing is not getting
that thing and not getting that thing might be certain that that one
could not have that thing and being certain that that one could not have
that thing is certain to need that thing if that one does not get that
thing and that one can not get that thing if that one does not get that
thing and that one is certain that it is a thing that one could have if
that one had that thing then that one will want that thing and that one
wanting that thing will be certain that when that one gets that thing
there will not be any reason why that one has not got that thing and
that one will have that thing if that one gets that thing and that one
will get that thing if that one can get that thing. That is enough to
make some certain of something. That is enough to make any one say
anything. Any one saying anything and every one saying something is
saying anything, any one saying anything about that thing is saying
anything.

Any one being born and born a baby if they are not a man will be a woman
and if they are not a woman will be a man unless they are dead before
they come to be grown.

Any one born and saying something is saying anything and saying anything
is saying something about being born and coming to be a man and being
born and coming to be a woman. There are many being living. Any one of
them can say anything. Any one can say something. Each one of them
saying anything is saying in the way of being a man or being a woman and
any one saying anything is saying something and any one saying something
is saying anything.

There are enough being living to be very many being living and there
are enough of all of them saying something and they are each one of them
saying anything.

Altogether some of them were there where if a noise were made all of
them said something. All of them saying something any of them said
anything and any of them saying anything some were certain that some of
them were saying something. Some of them being certain, any of them were
saying anything.

Any of them saying anything so could be continuing and all of them being
continuing one could be saying that all of them had been saying anything
and not any of them had been saying something and if one of them had
been saying something, they all of them having been saying anything, not
any of them had been saying something. One of them saying something all
of them were saying anything. All of them saying anything any one of
them was saying that they would not have been saying something. They
were altogether and then they were not altogether and they were not
again all together and they were not again all together because all of
them having been all together and any of them having been saying they
were not saying something in saying that they could have been saying
anything.

One was one and being that one and telling that having been that one
that one had been that one when that one had been that one, that one
being that one that one had been that one in having been that one when
that one had been the one that had been that one.

This one was one and could, remembering that thing and remembering that
thing, could not remember any other thing and not remembering any other
thing was remembering remembering having been and being that one and not
having been and not being remembering any other thing. That one being
that one remembered having been saying anything so that that one would
be the one saying something when any other one being one saying
something every one would have said something. That one was one then
having been one saying anything so that that one could be the one saying
something and every one would be one saying anything and not any one
would be one saying something. That one remembered having been that one.
That one was that one. That one remembered that that one was that one
when that one was remembering that that one being that one that one was
to be that one.

Some forget something. Some forget anything. Some are being the one
they are being when they are forgetting anything. Some can come to be
one having what they might have had if they had not forgotten something.
Some of such of them will forget something. Some of such of them have
conviction.

One who is a pleasant one in being one finding what he has been finding,
one who is a continuous one in feeling what he can be seeing is one who
is liking what he is liking and in liking what he is liking is not
mentioning that he is being that one and not mentioning that thing that
thing is not everything, that thing is something that may not be
anything.

Having been complaining is something. Having been explaining is
something. Having been withdrawing is something. Having been emphasising
is something. Some one is one and being that one that one is not that
one and that one can be certain of anything in being one being one. That
one is one being one who can be certain of anything in being the one
being that one.

One knowing everything is knowing that sometime knowing something is
something but not everything. One knowing everything is knowing that
some one knowing something is one and being that one is the one knowing
what that one is knowing. One knowing everything is knowing that
sometime one will know some things some are knowing and one knowing
everything is knowing that knowing some things is something but not
everything as one knowing everything might be one always having been
knowing those things.

One knowing everything is one knowing that anything is exciting. One
knowing everything is knowing that knowing some things one might come to
know more things and one might have known everything and if one had
known everything then one could have decided to know everything and
having decided to know everything then one knowing everything would be
knowing that everything is exciting.

Believing anything is believing that something is something. Believing
that something is something is beginning not to be exciting. Doing
anything is doing something. Doing anything is exciting if doing that
thing excites some one.

Believe that something is something. Believe that believing that
something is something every one can believe something. That is
beginning not to be exciting.

Believe that any one is the one that one is and believe that any one
doing the thing that one is doing is doing that thing and doing that
thing is being that one and being that one is doing that thing. Believe
that and any one can believe something. Believe that believe any one
can believe something and that can begin not to be exciting.

Bremer is doing what he is doing that is he is doing what he would be
doing if he were believing that he was doing what Paul is doing. He is
not believing that he is doing what Paul is doing. He is believing that
Paul is doing what Paul is doing. Bremer is doing what Bremer is doing.
Bremer is believing that Paul is doing what Paul is doing. Bremer is
doing what Bremer is doing. Bremer is doing what he would be doing if he
were believing that he was doing what Paul is doing. Bremer is believing
that Paul is doing something. Bremer is believing that he is doing
something. He is doing something. He is believing something, this can
begin not to be exciting.

Herford is doing something. He is believing that not any one is
believing anything. He is believing that he is doing what he would be
doing if not any one was believing that he was doing anything. Any one
can be believing that he is doing something. Any one can believe that
doing something is not anything. He can believe that not any one is
believing anything. He can believe he is not believing anything. He can
believe that he is doing what he would be doing if he were not believing
anything. He is believing that doing anything can begin not to be
exciting.

Clellan will believe what he can believe not any one can believe who is
doing what he will be doing if he does what he is going to be doing.
Clellan believes that he can believe what he will believe if he does
what he will do. Clellan does what he does. Clellan will do what he will
do. Clellan will believe what he does believe he can believe if he can
do what he will do. Clellan does what he does. Clellan believes that
doing what he does can be exciting. Clellan believes that believing what
he believes he can believe will begin not to be exciting.

Cheyne was answering and answering he was doing something and doing
something he was not believing anything and not believing anything he
was saying something and saying something he was irritating and
irritating he was pleasing and pleasing he was dying and dying he was
burning.

Helen was hoping to be laughing. She was saying she was going to keep on
laughing. In going to be laughing she was beginning and in beginning she
was continuing. She was continuing, she was believing anything, she was
believing that she had been laughing, she was believing that she had
been continuing. She went on believing. She was believing something.
Believing something she was believing everything and believing
everything she was believing just what she was believing. Believing
just what she was believing she was believing and believing she was
completing continuing and completing continuing she was being believing
and being believing she was astonishing and being astonishing she was
not being astonished then.

Paul was one believing and being one believing he was saying what he was
not saying, he was saying that he was one believing and not saying what
he was not saying. Paul was one and being one was feeling that doing
something might come again and again to be exciting and coming to be
exciting he would have been one believing that he had been saying what
he had not been saying. Doing something being exciting so that some one
doing it is doing it again, doing something being exciting and believing
being existing he was not saying what he was saying, he was saying what
he was not saying.

Dethom was saying that he was believing in saying what he was saying.
Dethom was saying that he was believing that doing something that is
exciting is exciting. Dethom was doing what he was saying he was doing.
Dethom was believing what he was saying he was believing.

Dethom was winning. Dethom was remembering all of any one being one
winning. Dethom was a decided one. Dethom was expecting enough to be
receiving what any one winning could be receiving. Dethom was winning.
Dethom liked something. Dethom was not convincing as being one losing
what he would be winning. Dethom was hoping when he was hoping. Dethom
was hoping when he was winning. Dethom was winning. Dethom was liking
that this would be continuing. Dethom was hoping when he was hoping.
Dethom was liking something. Dethom was winning. Dethom was expecting
what he was expecting when he was winning. Dethom was winning. Dethom
was hoping that this would be continuing. Dethom was hoping all he was
hoping. Dethom was winning.

Dethom was enlarging what he was enlarging. Dethom was filling what he
was filling. Dethom was feeling what he was feeling. Dethom was
improving what he was winning.

Dethom was expecting what could be coming. Dethom was hoping what he was
hoping. Dethom was feeling what he was feeling. Dethom was filling what
he was filling.

Dethom was arranging what he was arranging. Dethom was not arranging
what he was destroying. Dethom was not destroying what he was arranging.
Dethom was hoping what he was hoping.

Any one being one and remembering that being one is everything of that
thing is being one remembering that that thing is something that that
one could be remembering if that one had not been then being one
forgetting what that one could be remembering. Being one being all of
that one is not anything if one is not remembering everything of that
thing. Being one being all of that one is something that that one is
willing to be arranging when that one is remembering all of that thing.

Clellan, why should Clellan remember all that he is remembering when he
is remembering everything that he can remember if he is not being one
forgetting that being one is all of being that one. Clellan is
remembering all he does remember. Clellan is remembering that being one
is all of being that one. Clellan is forgetting what he is forgetting.
Clellan is arranging what he is remembering, Clellan is arranging what
he is forgetting. Clellan is determining that being one is being all of
that one and that remembering and forgetting is not everything. Clellan
is arranging that he is being one being all of that one. Clellan is
arranging what he is arranging. Clellan is expecting that arranging is
everything.

Clellan is forgetting what he is forgetting. Clellan is remembering what
he is remembering. Clellan is deciding that forgetting is something,
that remembering is something, that arranging is something. Clellan is
feeling that he is deciding. Clellan is deciding what he is deciding.
Clellan is feeling that being that one is being that one. Clellan is
deciding to be arranging that being that one is being that one.

If his contentment had been greater, if Larr's contentment had been
greater he would not have been content and he would not have been
content because of reasons he could know if he could know that he was
not content. His contentment would not be greater if he knew that he was
not content because he would then know something of what he did not
invent. He did not invent all that he came to tell that he had invented.
No he had not invented those things, he had not done any of the things
he came to understand in inventing them, in doing them. He did think. He
thought very well and in thinking very well he did invent thoughts and
in inventing thoughts he told all of them and having told all the
thoughts he had invented he told what those thoughts would invent and
had invented and he had not invented what he told that he had invented,
and they had not been invented those things, they would have been
invented if he had had thoughts that would invent them and they were
things that were invented and he told how he would have invented them if
he had told all that he had told and he invented all the thoughts he
said he invented. He did invent all the thoughts he said he invented.
Larr did invent many thoughts and he told all the thoughts he invented.

If any one were one being such a one such a one as any one is then that
one would be one expressing all of that thing and expressing all of that
thing would be what that one expressing is expressing. Each one is one.
That is enough to satisfy some, each one being one is enough to satisfy
some. One being one is one that many are certain is a different one from
the ones others are who are not like that one. That one is a different
one and being a different one he is the one knowing everything of there
being very many who are just like him. That is enough to satisfy him.

He is one and being one and being afraid enough and being not afraid
enough he comes to be one expressing enough of being that one to be the
one being that one to any one and every one is satisfied enough that he
is that one.

If he said anything and he did say anything, if he said anything he said
that he was satisfied enough in being that one to be enjoying something
and enjoying something he was losing what he was not keeping and getting
what he was having and trying what he was expecting. He was losing
enough and keeping enough and getting enough and having enough and
trying enough and expecting enough to be that one being that one. Being
that one being that one was continuing and continuing he was saying
anything of that thing, of being that one and saying anything he was
saying that he was saying enough to satisfy himself of something of
being that one. He was that one. He was satisfying any one enough that
he was that one. He was satisfying himself of something of being that
one.

When every one comes not to hear what they hear and see what they see
and feel what they feel and mean what they mean, when every one is
changing and eating and drinking and dying and when every one is using
what they are using and are having what they are having then every one
being one every one is being the one every one is being and that being
anything and anything being something then something being something and
anything being anything and everything being everything every one will
be saying what each one of them is saying and each one of them is saying
what each one is saying and each one is saying what each one saying is
saying.

If Clellan asks a question he will ask if some one knowing something
must not be knowing that that can be something to be known. Clellan
asking that question is saying that he has learnt quite learnt that
knowing something one does not know that that is something that can be
known. Clellan is continuing to be working and he will be working when
he continues to be working. Clellan is one asking and answering in
asking and answering.

If everything is altogether and everything is not altogether, if
everything is altogether and everything is altogether, if everything is
altogether then everything is something if everything being altogether
is anything. Everything being altogether is this thing.

When you see it so clear it is certainly all there. If it is all there
then every where is every where. If every where is every where then any
one seeing anything clear is seeing it there. Anywhere is anywhere.

Seeing clear is something. Seeing clear is everything. Seeing clear is
seeing what any one seeing is seeing and any one seeing is seeing and
any one seeing and seeing clear is seeing and seeing clear. Seeing clear
is seeing here, seeing clear is seeing there, seeing clear is seeing
anywhere. Seeing is seeing. Seeing clear is seeing clear.

If he were seeing clear if Gibbons were seeing clearly he would clearly
see that he was describing what he was seeing. Gibbons was describing.
Gibbons could describe what he was seeing and wearing and what any one
was wearing that he was seeing. If he were seeing clearly he would be
seeing that he was describing what he was seeing. He would be seeing
clearly if he were seeing clearly and he would be seeing clearly when he
saw clearly that he had been describing what some are wearing.

That is what some are doing, some are wearing what they are wearing and
are describing what they are wearing.

Lilyman was wearing what he was wearing and in wearing what he was
wearing he was clearly seeing that being what he was being he was
wearing what he was wearing and was describing what he was describing.
He was being the one being all of that one and doing all of that thing
and doing all of that thing he was clearly seeing all he was seeing and
he was clearly seeing that he was wearing what he was wearing and he was
wearing that he was clearly describing what he was wearing, what he was
describing. He was describing that if he was clearly seeing he would be
wearing all that he could be wearing and he was clearly seeing that he
was clearly describing that he was wearing what he was wearing.

Fabefin was not flourishing and not flourishing he was regretting that
he was continuing. He was regretting that he had been wearing what he
could not be describing. He was seeing what he would not be wearing and
seeing what he would not be wearing he was improving in aspiring. He
did wear something and he did change the way of wearing that thing and
he did then clearly describe that he was wearing what he was wearing in
the way he wore what he wore. He did wear something and wearing
something he was attacking what he would be wearing if he wore what he
could wear. He was not attacking when he was winning. He was not
attacking when he was winning and he was not winning. He was wearing
what he was describing he was wearing. He was describing that he was
wearing what he would wear if he wore what he wore.

Watts did not continue to wear what he would continue to wear. He did
not continue to wear that and he did not continue to wear that when he
wore what he wore. He was wearing what he did wear.

If anybody wished that they saw what they meant to see then they would
see that anything is something. If anything is something then explaining
is explaining and explaining being explaining explaining is that thing.
Explaining being that thing, anything being something, then wishing to
be seeing what they are meaning to be seeing is something and that being
something deciding is something. Deciding being something, saying
something is saying something.

If some one said something he said that thing, if some one answered
something he answered that thing, if they both were then being living
any one could be hearing what any one would be hearing. Being finishing
and being beginning are being meeting and leaving.

He says that he has said what he said and that changing he is not
repeating what he has been saying.

She says that she has said what she said and that changing she is
repeating what she has said.

A new thing having come it is a new thing and being a new thing and
repeating being existing it is a new thing.

One if he is talking is saying that he is feeling all that he is
feeling. He is saying that he is feeling all that he is feeling.

He is saying that feeling all that he is feeling he is saying that he is
feeling all that he is feeling.

Donger was not quicker than he would have been if he did not say all
that he did say. He was not slower, he was not quicker.

If every one said something and every one is saying anything if any one
said something every one would be certain that any one could be tired
enough to say what any one says. Saying what any one says is saying
everything and any one can be certain that any one can be tired enough
to say everything.

Saying everything is what any one saying that they are saying what is
being said is saying they can be saying and saying they can be saying
everything they can be tired enough in having been saying everything.

Murdock did say that if one were very tired one could come to be
completely tired. Murdock did say that being completely tired one was
not so tired but that one could look for a way to find what one wanted
to find so that one could have a way of saying what one would be saying
if one were saying everything. Murdock in not being tired was not
troubled that he was quite tired. He was troubled that being tired is
being tired and being tired is being certain that everything is
everything.

Murdock is not tired. Murdock is not tired because he does not tire when
he is hoping that he will not be completing not finding that which he is
not persisting in expecting. Murdock is not tired.

There is a way of not being tired. There is a way of coming to know that
having a way of doing what one is doing one can do what one does do.
Clellan is saying, and he would be tired if one could be tired in saying
what he is saying, that having a way of doing what one does one can do
what one does. He is saying this thing. He is saying that any one can be
tired and every one is tired and not being tired one can do what one
does do when one has a way of doing what one does. He is saying that
that is all that thing.

He is saying that going to be doing what one is doing is making the
doing of that thing a thing to complete tiring the one doing that thing.
He is saying that going to be doing what one is doing is what he is not
going to be doing again. He is going to do what he does in the way he
does what he does. He says that all of that thing is all of that thing.

Enough come so that somebody hears something. Enough go so that hardly
anybody is left. Enough are left so that some hear what they hear. Some
come where they did not hear and some go where they will see what was
seen.

If many come then many are here and if few come then a few are here and
if they are here often they come again and coming again they hear what
they hear.

One having come and heard is asking if he has heard all that he heard.
That one going is not coming again if hearing all he has heard he is not
asked to come again. He does come again and asks why he has not heard
what he intended to hear. He comes again and hearing what he could hear
he asks what it was that he has not heard. Coming again he does not
look at what he has not seen because he has seen all of not looking at
that and he has asked that that is what he is to hear again. He is that
one.

No not all that all can hear is enough to change what all are changing.
In changing it all and all is changing in changing it all it is
determined that any one who is convinced is convinced. This is why in
having what each one is having all are having what all have come to be
having. This is enough to determine every one to continue and every one
being determined some remain where they did not like to stay and staying
there they are determined, quite determined.

Starting in is not beginning because starting in has come when not any
one has told all that they have to tell and beginning is beginning
telling something. This is all that each one learning is explaining to
some one who has or who refuses something.

If the one having what he has keeps what he has he can say that he had
what he had but did not expect to keep it.

If one coming to remember all that has been happening knows that he can
not lose everything he can decide to give up keeping anything and in
that way he can resolve quite completely resolve what he has known he
could not resolve. This is all of what has been happening and very much
has been happening and very much is happening.

The joy of having a little thing when all of that little thing has
disappeared is what is interesting some who are having something of what
they have been having. That is not enough to complete quite everything.
That is enough to help arrange something.

Having all of something is not useful when all of that thing is lacking
what it is lacking. This is not annoying. This is not discouraging. This
needs all there is of explanation.

Clellan came to where if he had not come he would have been deciding
that not any one going anywhere could come. He did not like everything.

It is in a way what Clellan is doing doing what he has been liking. It
is in a way what Clellan is not expecting not doing what he is doing.
Clellan is feeling that he has not been arranging everything. Clellan is
quite feeling this thing.

All and enough of them have come all have gone away. Some look again.
Some do not look again. It is not a sad thing. Always it is not a
frightening thing. That is quite enough.

If Antliss had continued to win he would have been astonishing because
he could astonish any one by believing what he did believe. He believed
what could astonish any one that he was one believing. If he said that
he expected all he expected any one could come to be certain that he was
not knowing that expecting is what not any one having what he is having
is doing. And he was not expecting what he, having what he was having,
could be saying that he was expecting without astonishing every one if
any one could believe that he was saying what he was saying. Antliss was
not peculiar, he was not strange, he was not really frightened, he was
not careful, he was not quite stupid, he was not at all lazy, he was not
complicated, he was clearly saying what he was saying in the way that
not any one is clearly saying that thing. He did feel that something
would not be coming and he was not expecting anything of its coming. He
was not expecting to be having what he would not be having.

Enough of all who know that they have read something say that reading
that thing is quite exciting. Some say that they have come to a
conclusion. Some say that there should be more reading before there
comes concluding. Any one can say anything.

There comes then to be everything. Very many being mentioned some are
remembering something of all of them and are saying that saying what
they are saying is saying what is being said.

To begin. There is one. There being one there have been some. There
having been some there have been a number but not a great many.
Remembering all of them is remembering what any one saying anything is
saying. That is enough to arrange something. That is all that has not
been mentioned.

Not nicely having what all are having is to be nicely having what all
are having. This could be satisfying and being satisfying every one can
be remembering something.

Not enough can be enough and being enough quite enough is enough and
being enough enough is enough and being enough it is that. Quite all
that can be what it is and all of it being that, quite all of it is all
there is of it.

Doing it again is not finishing everything. Doing it again and again is
not finishing everything. Doing it again and again and again is not
finishing everything. Doing it again and again and again and again is
not finishing everything. Doing it again and again and again and again
and again is not finishing everything. Doing it again and again and
again is not finishing everything. Doing it again is not finishing
everything.

After Clellan said that he knew that he was not feeling that expression
is needing that it is determined he was not feeling all the hope he had
been feeling and he had felt more hope when he was not saying what he
was saying when he was understanding all he was hearing. Clellan did not
deny that he had heard something. Clellan did not deny that he felt
something.

Donger liked what he found when he looked for that for which he was
looking. Donger did not like all the searching he was doing. Donger did
not like all he found when he was tired of looking for that for which he
was looking. Donger did not have what he said that he needed and Donger
did not begin again. He certainly did not begin again in having been
finding everything. Donger said all that.

If it was a long time being living, coming and leaving, it was quite
happening very often. It came and it went and sometimes Clellan stayed
and sometimes Clellan did not stay.

Clellan not staying was something. Clellan staying was something. That
did happen. That did not happen.

All who have a way of not completing, and any one having a way of not
completing is any one, all having a way of not completing some time
being long enough is long enough and being long enough any one coming
and going is, is not staying.

Donger asked if he could go where some one went and he did not get an
answer then and he did not need answering enough to complete being
living to get any answer later. He came to get what he asked and he did
not ask anything he might have asked and he did not because he was not
asking. He was not asking and he did not need remembering that thing
remembering that he was not asking. He remembered enough.

He talked when he talked very much and he talked when he did not talk
very much and he talked.

All that there was if some said what they said was what they all did if
they did what they did.

In the beginning one saying something and doing something was
remembering that not having been admitting anything that one was one
convincing and being convincing was admitting something and admitting
something and saying something and doing something was not admitting
what was not being convincing. That one was older and being older was
doing was saying what that one had been doing and saying.

If any one can determine that they are saying what they are saying and
doing what they are doing they are determining that they are hearing
what they are hearing and seeing what they are seeing. This is not
exciting, this can be annoying, this can be common, this can be
convincing, this can be perplexing, this can be repeating.

One and he was one and any one can be one and any one is one and any one
being one being one is being one, one was saying what he was saying and
doing what he was doing and he was determining what he was saying and
determining what he was doing and he was hearing what he was hearing and
seeing what he was seeing.

If some one came and another one came and some one said and another one
said and some one heard and another one heard and some one saw and
another one saw then there would be enough who were dead if everybody
came to be dead and there would be enough being living if every one were
living and certainly some did not see everything and some did not do
everything and some did not hear everything and some did not see
everything and one said what another said and one saw what another saw
and one did what another did and one heard what another heard and one
came and another came and one left and another left and if everybody did
what they did and anybody came and if they did not see what they saw and
if they heard what they heard then certainly something had happened and
something having happened some said what they said.

It was a happy way the way he stayed all day any day and he said, what
did he say, he said that he had gone and he had seen and that he would
do what he liked to do and he liked to do what he had arranged to feel
he would do when he saw all there was to see.

In looking for everything and finding everything and asking any one to
leave all that they had and to give all they had some are seeing that
they are seeing all that there is to be seen.

It was not satisfying, not upsetting, not amusing, not perplexing to say
all that is being said about any one having been feeling what that one
was feeling.

Polly and she was not using all she had bought Polly was offering and
forgetting to give what she would give if she had had packed what she
had taken up to pack. Polly did not remember everything.

Anne Helbing is standing. Anne Helbing in standing was wearing what some
would not be needing to be wearing if they could stand without wearing
them. Anne Helbing had them on and she was standing, Anne Helbing was
sitting, Anne had them on and was sitting. Anne told some one that she
had them on. Anne did not come back again and she was not suffering and
she was working. Anne was standing and sitting and was wearing the
things she needed for standing.

George did not come when he had not had all that he would have had if he
had gone everywhere where he could go. He found a thing that he gave
every one. He did not take what he intended to take.

Henns was prospering that is to say he had a wife and a baby and he had
been sick. This was not all he had in being living and he thought about
it and he did all that he did in getting what he got.

Henns had a father and a brother. His father was prospering that is to
say he married again and he need not have done it then and he did not
keep all that he kept when he continued in not being annoying. The
brother, Henns had a brother, the brother was prospering. He was
directing everything he was directing and he was accidentally dying.
Henns did not come back when he was where he was and he did not continue
when he did what he did and he was prospering when he received what he
received and when he did not expect to have any more children. He did
not have very many children.

Antliss was not successful in urging every one to be the one hearing
what every one could be hearing. Antliss was not successful. Antliss
expected that some who were not successful would be continuing feeling
what they were feeling. They were feeling what they were feeling.
Antliss was not successful, he was holding all he was expecting to be
able to hold. He was urging all he could urge in explaining the way he
was explaining that he was feeling what every one is feeling.

Some are dead and if they had heard that said they would not repeat that
they were dead.

Sender came and he said that those who were not dead had not said what
some said they said. Sender did not stay long. Sender intended to come
again. He would come again. When he came again he would say something of
what some who were not dead had not said.

All who are tired and are hearing what they are hearing are expecting to
be hearing that some one who is waiting is going to ask if he will be
visited. It is a very difficult thing being tired and hearing what one
is hearing when some are not asking what they might be asking.

It is easy to begin again if repeating is anything and repeating being
existing it is a difficult thing to commence answering something and
commencing answering is all of that easy thing and that easy thing is
existing.

All who have left have not come again and coming again they are saying
that it is an easy thing not to hear what they are hearing, not to
repeat what they are repeating.

It is kindly to be friendly, it is pleasant to be repeating, it is
agreeable to be returning having been answering, it is charming that
some one says something, it is pleasing that some one has heard
something, it is disturbing that some one has not been expecting
something, it is astonishing that some one has forgotten something, it
is disappointing that some one is not saying that he has not seen what
he has seen, it is saddening that some one has put something back and
has gone then and has come to leave nothing that he had when he came. It
is enough to please any one that every one who has come has not said all
that they say when they come again. It is not amusing when two who have
come have gone. It is not disturbing when three who have come and gone
have asked a question. It is not interesting when some one who is
pleasing has pleasantly explained everything.

If in having told a thing one has been appreciated then one can want not
to tell it again and one can tell it again and one can be interesting
then and one can be not very interesting then. It is exciting to be
tired and to tell all that has been told. It is exciting to be tired and
to be not expecting anything. It is exciting to be tired and to sit and
tell all about everything any one is doing. It is exciting to be tired.

If it were pleasing to be enjoying one could enjoy something and one
could say that they had heard all that they heard. If it is not pleasing
to be enjoying and if it is not pleasing is it continuing, if it is not
pleasing to be enjoying and one is hearing what one is hearing then
certainly if there is any purpose in enjoying being pleasing then it is
easy enough not to be enjoying.

Is it or isn't it pleasing not to be enjoying and if it is is it
continuing and if it is not is it continuing. If it is what it is then
it is easy enough for it to stay where it stays and if it stays where it
says is it what it has been. Donger saw what he said meant something and
he said that if it meant something he was doing what he did not intend
to do and he did not intend to finish everything he began. Donger said
that he saw what he said meant something and he did know that when he
asked if something was something he did know that an answer would come
and if it came it might not come again. If it came again and an answer
that came might come again it might be the thing that would determine
him to ask something that he had just asked. Donger said that he knew
that what he said had that meaning.

Donger knew enough to remember that if something is something he could
ask what he would ask if, he knew what he knew. Donger knew and asked
and he said perhaps it is perhaps it isn't and he said that if he asked
and something is something it was very well for him to have asked what
he hoped to ask.

They all liked asking that any one who decides what is decided decides,
when it is to be decided that that which is to be decided is to be
decided. They all ask and they all do not refuse and they all do not
hear and they all stay and they all stand and they all open what has
been open when anything that is open is open. If they do not like it
they will ask so that they can not like it and when they can not like it
it is enough that they have seen enough to have seen what they have
seen. It is not very likely that any of them felt that it would be
finished in the way it came to be finished. It is not very likely.

Enough of them who walk walk quickly and so there are very many. There
being very many and very many not walking there are very many.

If he told each one what each one wanted to know who asked him who had
come he would have to tell each one what he told the one who had just
asked him. And he did this thing.

Any one talking and every one talking and any one laughing and every one
laughing might be meaning that they were feeling that some one was a
funny one. This is not certain.

Not like that is the other way and like that is the same way and all are
not doing again, walking. Walking is sounding and talking is existing.

Pulling and going is regularly sounding and answering is intermittently
continuing. Running and disappearing and gesticulating and waiting is
happening.

Being proud and easily pleased and surprised and amused and quiet and
quickly walking and sufficiently eating is regularly sounding.

Talking and not turning and answering and not seeing is quietly
continuing. Waving and showing what is imitating is copying some one.

A little one preparing is a little one expressing and a little one
expressing is a little one discovering and discovering is saying what is
truly efficiently existing and saying what is truly efficiently existing
is describing what everything badly chosen is lacking.

He was pleased to hear that we ate all we ate. He was pleased to hear
that we left what we left. He was pleased to hear that we had been where
we had been. He was pleased to hear that we asked what we asked. He was
pleased to hear that we knew what we knew. He was pleased to hear that
all had looked at what they had looked.

He who made a motion to call some one made a noise and then he said that
he had been misunderstood and he said that he would repeat what he had
said and then he said that he had not been understood and that he would
not ask what he had asked. He said that he knew what he would not hear
and that he would not ask again.

If all did what they turned to do they would all stay where ever they
went and all staying any one going away would notice something. That is
enough to make any one remember all of the thing that was seen when some
did not do so quickly as some one else would do something that one had
come to do.

If the one saying all was saying then saying all would be the thing that
not every one who was saying all would then say. Enough is said if every
one is saying all.

If every one is saying all and every one is saying after waiting is
saying we are coming, we are going, we are meeting then every one is
saying what each one is saying and each one is saying everything that
each one is saying.

If they are all not alike that is enough to arrange being certain that
expressing what expressing is expressing is not expressing what
expressing is not expressing and anyway a pie that each one is putting
where each one is putting the pie each one is putting anywhere, in
putting the pie where each one putting a pie anywhere is putting a pie
each one is not putting the pie where in putting the pie he might be
putting the pie and each one is putting the pie where each one putting
the pie anywhere might be putting the pie in putting the pie where each
one is putting the pie that is anywhere. Each one putting the pie
anywhere is putting the pie anywhere. This is enough to please all and
all are not pleased when all are pleased. All are pleased and nicely
pleased and completely pleased when all are all pleased and all are not
pleased not quite pleased when each one doing what each one is doing
each one is not seeing that any one doing what any one is doing is doing
and a nice house where some have come and a house not so nice where some
have come, all of it and any of it is what is not annoying and each one
has eaten what has left in them all that has come out of them if they
face a way which is the other way they were facing when they were facing
the way they were facing when they were facing the other way.

One not being running was not being deserted. One not being waiting was
not being deserted. One not interfering was receiving what the other one
had who had what she naturally had and she would have what she naturally
had if she could have what she would naturally have.

If refusing is easily done then it is to be done as it is done when it
has come to be done so that some one will say to all, do not do so.

It is very high up and yet to be so high is not to say that that is
likely to be heavy if it is built lightly enough so that falling is not
easy.

Falling is not easy and it is not easy when there is a river that is
bigger than it is where it is smaller and it is not easy when there are
ways of hearing enough sounds that make all the little things come
together who were scattered until they were called. Falling is not easy.

It is impossible to disturb every one and yet it is done when anything
which is walking is appearing. It is done and then that is not ended not
at all ended. It is done and some little thing is not completed when it
is done. Not enough is left then to remain where any one had been.

Not any of all who were not wrong were right and that could have been
what some were saying if all were not saying what they saw when they
looked where they fell.

They did not fall all over the pleasant sound that was being sung. They
did not fall and they did not sit and they walked pretty well and in
walking they had not all the sizes they would have. They had sizes that
were larger and they had sizes that were smaller.

The ones who clap when they laugh and laugh when they look mean that
that they clap when they laugh and laugh when they look.

They all, all who saw while they heard what they heard, all were there
and remained until they were not to stay where they were any longer.

There was enough of all that had been done again to start all those who
were started to come again. They all came again. They came again and
they sat while they heard what they heard and saw all of some of what
they saw.

If some one was not liking doing something more it was not because that
one was feeling all of more being more it was because that one had not
had what she had not had when she had wanted what she had wanted.

Finishing not wasting any little thing is beginning not wasting any
little thing. It is enough that all who are finishing not wasting any
little thing are bowing when what has been living has come to be dead by
rolling over after kneeling. It is enough that some who are finishing
not wasting any little thing are waiting and doing very little moving
when what is dying has not been dead enough to be rolling.

They have something growing those who are finishing wasting any little
thing and if that which is growing is showing it is a completing thing,
a strangely completing thing.

If one has a thing that on the front of him is browning and he is
proceeding and meaning is existing, that is if he is the one and any one
is proceeding then he is the one and he is proceeding.

If they did not like it they would do it and this was not lightly why
there were three of them sitting and this was not uneasily why three
were standing and this was not suddenly why five of them were coming and
this was not entirely why all of them were waiting.

They who had a house and had all of it were the ones who had enough of
it to come out and in and to do it often. If there were three of them
three houses there were all of them all of the three houses three
houses.

If making a little movement such as nodding is done then it is a custom
that any one meeting any one is not talking if they have not met that
one. If they look if every one looks and has not said that he is feeling
then all of them are doing what they are doing because they have not
come to say what they could say if they had come to say what they would
say. This is in a way a pleasant way of walking and disappearing. This
is in a way a way of feeling that what is happening is surprising. This
is in a way a way of not regretting everything.

If in leaving some one is leaving then in having been disappearing some
one has been disappearing and has not been saying that he has said what
he said he would say if he saw what he would have seen if there had been
what there would have been if there was what there was as there was not.

A tiny violent noise is a yellow happy thing. A yellow happy thing is a
gentle little tinkle that goes in all the way it has everything to say.
It is not what there was when it was not where it is. It is all that it
is when it is all that there is.

If she who was lifting the thing that lifting was lifting she was
arranging putting anything where she was arranging putting what she was
arranging. If putting a thing that can be cutting where some one is
jumping is disconcerting it is a neat thing that not any one is being
quite cut then. It is a delicate thing that hanging down something is a
gentle thing. It is a lively thing that moving and clapping is a
measured thing. It is a queer thing that singing is a common thing. It
is an amusing thing that two are where they are when they were not
where they were.

If they are what they are and they intend what they do and they offer
what you use and they wear what they wear then it is naturally all that
they mean when they do not say that they are strange every day. They
move the way they go as they do not stay together in not at all leaving
one another. They do not manage it then when they are standing and
mounting anything they are riding. They need not be the last of it all
and they need not have been an irregular thing a thing not regularly
living.

If saying that being is existing is meaning that feeling is existing,
then talking when talking is happening is telling what is being told by
telling. Any sound that is louder or not so loud is one that is
happening when that sound is coming.

It is not necessary that a light that is changing is coming and going.
It is necessary that a sound that is continuing is coming from the two
who are sighing.

Likely to be familiar and not likely to be strange, very likely to be
the same and quite likely to be dark, likely enough to have it light and
very likely to have it strong, any way that is likely is very likely to
be old and every way that is likely is quite likely to be curling and
all that is likely is that it will not be different.

In turning a little thing into a little little thing and rolling what
was walking, it is not enough to be certain that it happening is not
anything, it is necessary to do it, quite do it again.

Multiplying is not adding, that is to say it is adding and adding is not
marking, adding is not bowing, adding is not laughing, adding is that
which walking comes to be sitting and not expecting all of any
attention. Adding is not complicating. Adding is teasing. Adding is a
division of three and one and that would make four if all of adding was
subtracting.

A little way is longer than waiting to bow. Not bowing is longer than
waiting longer. It would sadly distress some powder if looking out was
continual and sitting first was happening and leaving first was
persisting. It would not change the color, it would not harmonise with
yellow, it would not necessitate reddening, it would not destroy
smiling, it would not enlarge stepping, it would not widen a chair or
arrange a cup or conclude a sailing, it would not disappoint a brown or
a pink or a golden anticipation, it would not deter a third one from
looking, it would not help a second one to fasten a straighter collar or
a first one to dress with less decision, it would not distress Emma or
stop her from temperately waiting, it would not bring reasoning to have
less meaning, it would not make telling more exciting, it would not make
leaving necessitate losing what would be missing, it would though always
mean that three and one are not always all that remain if ten remain and
eight are coming.

They always thought that they did all eat what was said to be what was
given to them. They did not fail themselves then.

If the color is not dark and it is dark but is not predestined, if the
color is dark and the passing away of walking is not too quick then all
that was expected from asking was that what had been done had not had
any way of laughing. That was what was left when there had been all that
was not meaning that what was dark had come to be dark as it was dark as
it had been dark. It was not lighter.

The only feeling that is she is the way she did not see and she did lean
she did quite lean alone. She did not desert the reward and she had it
all and she did bow and there was there where she went there was there
certainly all of not needing to be refusing having her relieve saying
good evening. She did not have it all on and there could be more and
often when she was there she wore that which was where she was and it
was not all cut from the same place and that was not ceasing to be
intending to be completing being leaning and she was leaning and she was
not refusing needing to be keeping addressing bowing. She magnified
repeating being existing in repeating. She did not repeat speaking. She
did not deny good evening. She did not repeat leaning alone in leaning
where she was not without not leaning being existing.

All who stayed long enough and talked said what they said. He who talked
did not say what he said because he had been the one who had come to
stay away. And this was not anything. He liked having it and he liked
asking to leave it.

All of them were not alone. The way to be alone, the way to stand and
walk, the way to sit and look, the way to talk, all of it is not
beguiling and passing away is a way to complain.

Very likely they did not have a little more those who had and have what
they have. Very likely the ones they know are the ones they know. Very
likely it would not do any harm to say what they say as they do say what
they say. Very likely they can laugh when they laugh and very likely
they like what they like when they like what they like.

It is always a way to say that going away is a way in going away.

If stumbling is continuing then a side-walk is restoring. If a
side-walk is restoring then eating is satisfying. If eating is
satisfying then undertaking is beguiling. If undertaking is beguiling
then shooing is concentrating. If shooing is concentrating then
resounding is destroying. That is the way to sleep.

If a piece that is longer is longer and stirring is wetting then surely
no one need know anything.

To refuse is the way to refuse all the way and there is enough and to
spare when in being asked to take what is given not being there is all
there is of not having had anything. Quantities are not lost when there
is satisfaction and yet there is the whole way of counting and there is
some way of retiring. Nevertheless it cannot be seen that the way to
remove what is not seen is not the way that washing makes plain. It is
slightly difficult to have what is being had and to say that sleeping is
sleeping a little any day. It is not thoughtful to think that the way to
make a sound is by hearing a roaring that may be a mingling and
certainly is existing.

All the perplexity of congratulation is removed when two are talking and
are saying that they are not where they were. They have been moving and
they saw one and pleasantly took something and they did not see one and
this had to do with eating. Particularly undertaking refusing everything
is a means that is wholesome when health and wealth is not
deteriorating. All that can be included is not all that is withheld and
rashly enough the water that came all flowed away. There was then a
happy ending.

If two talking together are saying that they have not been together when
each one saw something then they are not always listening, they are
sometimes tired. This is enough so so that two can be married.

One is the one who came and looked down and did not frown and could walk
longer if the way which is long is harder. This one who did walk went
back again and said that that which was seen was peculiar. The one who
did not walk would walk longer and did walk and did see that thing and
did say that perhaps it was peculiar but it did not matter as it would
not be seen again and certainly not longer. They were not opposing
listening neither the one or the other who was talking. They were not
asking it again as much and this was the way of arranging that there was
not to be all there was of future. They took a walk together and they
came oftener and they were not hidden by the light that made a flicker.
They had undertaken enough.

It was a lovely way and the man who stood was slow and the hidden thing
that was clearly seen was climbing in between. If either was together
and the two were all then it was not only lightly but delicately and
completely and astonishment never can be expressive.

Altogether to look and pronounce that conversation is not pleasing is
the way to accept responsibility and to have children. This is not
alarming. It is happening every day when the dining room is changing.

If the child is bigger and the noise comes quicker then the part that is
standing is lifted and the noise is not continuing. When the way to
remove what is lying has been seen then a little one that has an apron
ties a string and lying on anything is sleeping. This is not occupying
all of anything. Actually there has been a condition. Actually there is
a condition. Actually all of them are together. They are there and are
there where they stand and sit and look often. They are continuing.

If the accumulation of inexpediency produces the withdrawing of the
afternoon greeting then in the evening there is more preparation and
this will take away the paper that has been lying where it could be
seen. All the way that has the aging of a younger generation is part of
the way that resembles anything that is not disappearing. It is not
alright as colors are existing in being accommodating. They have a way
that is identical.

Charging the admission is not the only way of doing. Opening the falling
and seeing the illuminating is not the only way of whitening. The oily
half of the higher place is the hard things that do not get in and
remain. They change what is darker and they make louder what is regular.
They keep together and separate later. That is all of the rest. The half
that sleep are opening what is receiving. The two parts are enough
together to be closer. They are not seeking anything that is muddier.
Something is running and the sound is not increasing. It is loud enough
to wet the thing that is beginning. It is not undertaking to see what is
seen. Sleeping is continuing. Joining is quite soothing. All ways are
remarking something. It is again. It is where it has been. One again and
one again and that is everything as that is something. All of the eating
is beginning. One two has it. That is often. There is no remaining that
there is complaining. It is filling.

Standing and expressing, opening and holding, turning and meaning,
closing and folding, holding and meaning, standing and fanning, joining
and remaining, opening and holding.

It is a way the way to say that being finished is all of waking, it is a
way to say that not doing again what is being done again is a way of
intending to assist an only one. It is not too distracting to be there
where closing is coming before opening. It is the only way to know
everything. It can be done. All of the way is that way. Hardly ever is
there more perfection. All perfection is increasing. This is stimulating
and causing sleeping. One is there in the beginning and is finding
interrupting to be decreasing. That one is recommending saluting. That
one is not disappointed. That one is obliging. That one is remaining the
complete expression of knowing everything. That one is there and there
is that one.

A heavy way to pass that way is not the last way to pass that way.
Passing that way is passing away. It is being done again.

When the twin is not one and there has been a fat one the thin one is
not losing delicate existing. Singing is everything.

A far away place is near the place that is having the carriage standing.
Any one driving is bumping. That is the only way of returning excepting
walking.

A simple way of remaining away is not to say that the only way of
passing the day is waiting for what has come to stay. It is not so very
long and then any one can join. They do join, that one is the one used
to beginning and she is not moving where the light is not shining. This
is not a habit it is the way that changes some day when any change is
repeating what each one has been saying.

Which did she put in and take out again and which did she put in and
leave in and what did she say when she did put everything away and what
did she say when everything was not put away. She said that she was not
suffering. She said it was fatiguing. She said she was not worrying. She
said she would not ever do it again. She said she would not leave
anything. She said she would finish something in the morning. She said
she did not mean to begin again. She said she was not satisfied with
everything. She said she did not care to repeat what she had said. She
said she would be obliging. She said that that was not surprising. She
said that she did not have any such feeling. She did do everything. She
was succeeding. She was pleasing.

She could not be saying that authorising something was believing that
she was not having what she was having. Now I have it. Now I see. This
is the way. Not that way. The other way is not the way.

A lively way to call is to run and call and a lively way to stand is to
stand. A very lively way to say what is to say is to say that a happy
way to go away is to pay when there is something that can come to be
there where there will not be any way to say that there will not be
pay. He came back and offered enough so that when he heard what there
was he could advise that they had a precious thing. He did scold some.
He was not too neglectful when he went where there was not any smiling.
He adjoined where there was no indication of the meaning of acquisition.
He was all the same not tormented. He did not tolerate the rest. He did
not refuse that. He chose where he would leave what he had hoped to
choose. He did say everything. He told all that.

If there is not a duplicate when there is every way of telling that the
time is changing then it is very satisfying. There is the most complete
way of moving when some one disappearing has been calling. The sound
that is left is not so loud as the sound that would be left if all the
rest of the way was open. This is not enough to make any one really
unhappy.

If the little way was that way and the smell remained it would be nice
to smell tobacco. This is not the only mixture. Something else is
pleasing.

Half of all that which is the matter is the part that is the rest of the
disturbance and it is not a bother, not at all, it does not matter and
that is a simple matter, it is very simple, it comes to be that when
there is enough left and there is enough left when everything is there
and when everything is there that causes all that kind of pleasure and
all that kind of pleasure means it all. He was not very much afraid and
this was not the way he meant to say that he was prettily drawn this is
the way he meant to say that he agreed to follow and discover all that
often. He was a medium sized but not like that in saying enough. He was
the best of all. He was there and he did not dispute that he saw all he
saw. He was not obliging. There were there they same. They satisfied
that. They were equitable. They were not lenient. They were there. They
placed that. This is the same.

Water did not make all the best curves, it did some curving, it used to
make a noise, that is not the only way of washing, soap and some kinds
that smell are not the same as the best perfume. This is not the best
way to be loving. There is a way to be loving. The way to be loving is
to do that and not to say that something is something. That is not the
only way of having a feeling of having to sit where the sun is shining.
The only way to say what is the meaning of anything is to say that thing
and say it every morning and evening and in between and in between there
will be the whole day and a day is a kind of a day and a kind of a day
comes when there will not be again such a one. It is very likely that
the raising of the beginning is the saddest thing to keep continuing.
It is very likely that all the better will be coming. It is certainly
establishing that which will be succeeding. The water will be sweeter
and the soap has some intention. There is a lively winning of
establishing completely that which is continuing when one and that one
is the one who says what is said and that one will do that will say it
all, will be deciding something and something being anything, anything
is everything. It is the best way that way which is that way and that
way is establishing everything. All is alike. That is not decided. All
being alike control is the arrangement. One can say the same. One sees
all that.

The card said that the whole thing was the right size, and it was
disappointing that it was not there. The card did not say everything.

All holy and walking and all the rest not passing the two were certainly
saying that the whole evening was ending. They did not dispute that.
They had the principle of not being astounding. They were not wonderful.
They admired half of what was all there was. There was enough. They did
not leave it all. They were the only ones to say that they saw the
little things that did not eat any little piece. It was undertaken. It
was not done. They saw some looking. They did not change their
expression.

Pocketing by the pocket having in it what is in it is the illustrious
way of seeing the lights that are lit and seeing the spots that are
black. All the sun and the moon and the clouds and the lights together
can not help all the people who are living some where else where it is
comfortable for some who say that they like to see what they see. They
did not change the heavy horses and the quick carriages and the
whistling train and the lights that are lit, they did not change the
best flowers and fruits and cake, they did not dislike the kind of
stones that were shown where they were shown. They did not. They
mentioned everything. This is the way to say that they are not saying
anything to-day.

Leading the rain through the thing that is open and making it wet where
the smell has been smelling is the hardest way to kill the whole bull
that is charging in and running. It is not losing everything in losing
all the blood that is oozing. It is goring. It is not distressing. That
is one way to delay what is happening when it happens that day. They all
waved something. That was not everything. They did the rest. They
remained, they had all the noise. They did not disturb him and he was
one who was exciting and he was excited then. He held all that open. He
went telling that he was always willing. He did not repeat being
winning. He received all the sum and he said all that made him sad. He
did not advise anything. He was not there to be the only one. He said he
knew that. He did not leave the ring. He was obliging. He did not do
anything. He said he did not do anything. It was not a test. He knew all
the rest. He had done the same. It had been startling. He was not
subdued. He did not come distinguishing any one from every other one. He
was between some one and some other one. He did move away. He said that
that was all there was to do. He showed what he held up so that any one
could see what there was there. He was not refusing it. He did not say
all there was to say. He was not tired.

If the reason that the way that is the leaning in the writing is the
time when the little that is all that is four is the most that there is
and there can be all which is the most then the best which is the one is
the thing that is the four those four and there will be more. A hundred
and the ball and the rest and a ball and a little one who is not
staring, and the sound that is there where there is not too much air is
the pretty sound that comes when the only one says what is said about
air and sounds and heads. This is the best way and so there is the time
and there is all that and there is more and more is enough and there is
what will be wanted and it will be all the same and not any more is gone
when more is there where every where everything is all there. That is
enough and so much, such a thing, why the way it is made is the way it
and really there can be all that. In the time there is that time which
is all of the whole of it where there is not anything that is not where
there is one and one is that one and one. A loud sound is louder than
any other way a sound is loud.

Alarming looking at each one has begun. That is not the only way to stay
away. The rest of the way is gone when there is none who are pleasing to
some one who is one of the two of them and they are both agreeing. The
necessity of not using everything is what keeps them staying.

They did come. They came and it was the way they said they had stayed
that made the little one who sat where there was a seat eat what he ate.
He ate that and it was not the only way to ask for a pencil, it was
almost the best half of the whole that made them answer that the one who
had changed had been fatter. They said he had looked as if he were fat
when he was fatter, they said they were altogether. They meant that her
name was Lucy. They did not remember to say it. It was not complicated.
Everybody was not tired.

Half of the little piece was enough and if there was a quick movement
there would not be any change as the four who came would not come
often. That was the very friendliest thing to do to have a little pew
and not to sit in it and not to keep still a minute and to have a bed
and to have it said that the bed is not the best bed that was made when
there were not left any beds that had marble that was not colder than
some other that was not marble when it was where they saw it. It was not
the only bone the piece that was left when the day passed and in the
evening it was late, it was not the only piece there was when the little
one said that he would not stay to eat if he was to be taken away to go
to bed. They all ate something and they knew it was wet. Yesterday had
not been away. That was not easy not to say. They did say that they had
not been away.

All across the best of the wall space there is the place that is where
the pretty thing is and not alone is it there not alone, it is not
there. This is not what he said. He came to say that he knew that all
that that meant was that he had done very well to keep all those he kept
because if it did happen that he meant to keep away he would not have
all that which he said he had and he did not mean to refuse everything
he meant to finish very nicely. He did say that. He had been agreeable.
This was not the last time that he had the place finished. Certainly
not.

Able to answer he said that he was looking as he had to stay where there
was what he saw, he said that he liked flowers, he said that if he whom
he did not like to have living was rich, anything was awful. He did not
hesitate then. He came alone. That was nicer then, he did not say that
he had written the rest. If there was shown a piece that took up all
that space he would not part with it. He would not part with any of it.
Any day that was yesterday would keep bringing what he needed. He knew
that he had that little way. He said that he did not hear anything. He
came to remember a country that had been seen.

He was not the only one to have the meaning that a cold day that is
darker is darker. He did not underestimate the last of production. He
did say that he did not get any pleasure when one was showing what there
was. He did not wish to go. It was not the rest. He did not refuse to
repeat everything.

It was a likely day to hear the music play the day when the little one
was not any larger. She did decide the very wide street to avoid and she
did not say how prettily they play. She did not hesitate any. She was
not the tallest who sat there. She was the distinct expression of the
only decision. She was the leader of the exercise that expressed that
the way to do is not the only way to stay. She was remarkable.

How sweetly the tune that is written is saying that obeying is meaning
that apologising is not beautifying. How sweetly the tune that is
winning is expressing that regretting is not necessitating repetition.
How nicely there is agreeing when leaning is not forbidden. How sweetly
is repeating expressing that feeling is pleasing. How tenderly is the
expression expressing that all of it is saluting the whole of that which
is the same as that which is what is when changing is not dividing. It
is nicely done.

Not to ask the way when there is nothing else to say is the only way to
stay away. A longer one is not shorter. He can have a beard.

A lovely decision is the marvelous hope when the refusal is sullen and
the fire is going, a better piece of light is going when there has been
admiration for a piece that has been showing. Then turning away is the
way to give all the rest of the description of the reason that the whole
piece is together and has that meaning. I did not like her. She was not
unpleasant. She was not the only one to say that she did not know that I
did that. It was not a reputation. She was not antagonistic.

If there is no time to have the predestination, there can be half of all
that there is when there is all they have. They like living. They say
they are not hot. They say that the way to smell is to have the same
thing stay that is touched when touching is not diminishing. They need
the bath-room. They are not healthy. They have light and heat.

A remarkable exhibition was the one that showed that an aptitude for
delineation is the same as adjustment. It was admitted that having
explained that there would be undertaken a readjustment. The end was
outlined. The completion was distinguished. The relative actuality was
not detailed. There was precedence. There was not lingering. There was
the article that was not destroying. There was that meaning. There was
the description. These did have what there was no need to occupy. There
came to be that.

If the potatoe was there and the light were bright then it would be
sweet to be clean and to have the same seat. It is always necessary to
carry the same piece of bread and butter. It is nicely brown and yellow
and prettily sticking together that with what it is when it is where it
is and it is where it is as it is only where it is. It is the particular
attraction by which it is the piece that is eating and being eaten. It
is mentionable. It is not deceptive. It is the practice of everything.
It is what is necessary.

If the travelling has a way of stopping the staying where there is
continuation then certainly there has been that there is what is when
there is that time and condition. This is enough to begin that
satisfaction and commence that finishing.

In the part of the gold piece that has a bright center there is the
little place that hurts. It is the sweetest way to be any way.

The article that in sitting is slowly telling that starting is not
happily achieving the blameworthy criterion of arresting all
abomination, the particle there is when there is diminishing the
precipitation there is when the parting is not nearing, all the exchange
which is not returning is affording that illusion. It is not darkened.

Kindly let the person who in the pleasure is not accepting repudiating
anything, kindly let the one who is not anticipating accompany herself
then, kindly say something. She who is not destroyed is not obliging to
be refusing to reform what she is offering. She is not urgent. She has
not that participation. It is not altered when the time is increased and
the balancing is not upsetting when there is all that disagreement.
There is not compensation. She who is likely is possibly likely.

If he who threw it gaily was sitting he changed some position when he
gave some direction. He was younger.

There is the piece that is open and there is what there is commencing
and there is not any obstacle and there will not be any disposal.

If there is a high way and the pleasure of it is there when the lower is
sounding then the evening is not finishing and standing is passing. It
is not silent.

The grammar that is used is that which has that same way and it darkens
that piece which is every piece. It is not the penetration that brings
it all about. It is the loneliness that is what is the only way to say
that the blue eyes are the same and when there is not any change from
any name. It is possible.

The bargaining that is not coming when there is not that decision is
what has been suppressed. It will not happen.

The evening when the light piece is blacker and the darkness has not
come to engage anything is the satisfying shining. It is lying and there
it is the best when there is not that prediction. It is not a position.

If there are two and there is one there and another in the other
direction then slightly being pleased is to be happy. There is that
reason for not using the light that is to be burning. There is such a
simple way to say that breathing is that satisfaction. There is some
pleasure. This is the nature. That is the sound. There is the place.

If the particular objection is that there is a long time to keep that
ready which has to be used when there is that waiting then the whole
situation is the same when the garden is full and the objects are
separated by a piece of paper. The rain does not hurt everything. It can
be cold.

It is a steady bargain that which takes every one away. It is not the
only place to praise.

All the appetite that makes that little pain is not so far ahead when
the change is imminent. The one had that abandonment. It took all that
concentration.

He did not leave enough to establish the whole fire-place. This was
braging. He had all that to authorise.

Evading and then relaxing and then stipulating and then hearing that
there is a protection is not the whole way to have it said that there
has been laughing.

There where the voice is parting it is not changing the meaning. It is
the same. It has that elongation.

The president who has that definition is the one who has that
decoration. He is not placid. He is not discourteous. He is not robust.

He who wondered heard the listening and he was not distracted. He had
that intimate progression. It was not a party.

A best feeling is that which if that one has not been adding is what
that one is hoping to be smiling. He was not tender. If he was simple he
saw the way to ask not to have that which would be paid be paid away. He
did not come to get that pay. He used it all. He had not that hope. He
was begetting bargaining. He had that intention. He was predicting
succeeding.

A lot of dark ways are cheerful. They predict assuagement. It is not
past the time when all that has been sent has bought a loud sound. A
loud sound is not artificial. There can be enjoying satisfaction.

Let him see that in leading he has the sound that he is hearing. Let him
do that and the time he says he takes away is what he says needs tender
breathing. He is the best of all the poor and he is the most startling
when he is not alone. He describes everything.

The far help that teaching is not deceiving is urging him to repeat that
Isadore is money. He does not deny that of Lisa. He does not pass away.

A little piece cut off is not added if the piece of grain is using that
emotion. There is not that way to stay.

If we go away we say that we go away because if we stay we stay away
from there where we would be if we were where we were as we are when we
are there. We are not there. We do not say that we do not stay.

A way to say the way to go is the way to say that she is there. That is
the place that is not occupied. What dexterously indicate the
augmentation. It is not a precipice. Please the practice and the sight
remains restless. That is not the discomfort of every name. It is almost
enough to destroy a place. It is enormous. It is not rushing.

If the banner which is not hung waves gently that does not mean that the
only way to say that there must come to be a drum is the best way to put
all the pages in the paper. It is harder to hit the sitting position
than to stand up the way to stand up in being tried. This does not mean
that all that is mixed has the salt taste that pepper has.

The whole meeting has that noise and the noise not following some one is
talking.

There Harriet has come. She did that so well that enough sitting was so
wholesome that Jane did not go away. She did not have that idea.

Emma was not that one who said that she had been looking for some one.
She was the one that had the same warm cloak that was hers when she
bought her clothing and she had enough money that did not mean that if
William were waiting he would not stand on the end of his ulster. He did
not have that diagram. All the cabs were open. This did not make the
night colder. This did not show the Lutetia.

A practical lesson is one that is given.

Come to the edge of the border and there with enough crocheting any one
who is hard of hearing can come to have a subdued voice. A little iron
comes to take that place and that is not a discovery. A sign is enough
to destroy that invention.

He and she were sitting there and he and she were not comforting
everywhere where there is a chair. They did not put a little piece there
where there was a chair. They did not feel what they did when the name
that had used all of the time was mentioned. They were not employed in
looking.

Let the best way of saying how do you do occupy the morning and the
evening. This will not fill all the time. Happy day.

Ask the two to look at the table. One is not always looking. The other
has that astonishment. Something has changed. That is what would be the
defence if any one saw that she was flatter. She had the smile and it
was not lightening all her evenings. They were not always too hot. They
closed the heater.

Come and see the baking that does not trouble the oven and the kitchen.
There is not time to have the whole of all that glass and yet surely the
day is not darker than the rest of the evening. To open the door is not
to lose that look of there being some change and surely there is enough
to worry any one. She is anywhere.

He had not that plan and he was quite young. That did not make him speak
french. He spoke it quicker. In that way he was attracting having all of
the feeling that passing being a worker was giving to him.

She who was not resplendent was so honest that if she gave it all away
she made it cleaner. She did not look that way. She was using that
attraction and she was not so orderly that she did not own everything.
She could go away any way.

A longer brown when there is a chair there is what gives that long
meaning to that extreme extension. If it happens and there is any way
than certainly to stay is to stay away and that is the plan when any
certain one is the certain one that says he says he has all that there
can have been and is of that which is some plan. There is not that
defeat.

The sight that is the same as that hearing is the one that takes enough
of all that evening and so the whole which is what there is when ten
have that leaning is the weight and the height and the volume and there
is all there is of ten who are enough there.

They are there and the entrance is there where there is that air. They
have not come in to fill the time together they have the same invention
and that is all there is of that distraction.

Passing that expression they have all there is of what there is in some
indication. They have not that which is the same expression. This is
that position.

A lame way to say that the day is not that time and to stay away is that
intention is to repeat one question, to repeat that extension. He said
that he could not go to bed and he would not stay away because any day
is a cold day. He said all he said and then he came in. He was in and he
said that he said that same and that different thing. He did not accuse
that of being all of that thing. He said he was distributing that
extinction.

Pull it there and sit on that chair that is to say put out the hand and
walk forward and not push away what is not there where there is that
decoration. A longer stay and later going away and giving the attention
where the hand is extending that thing is not filling every one with
anything.

Separate them and do not put between them that which while not waiting
is paying attention to that thing.

Place the laughing where the smile is lending what there is of expecting
that attention. It is not expecting something. It is obeying all of that
consideration.


A place to stay when sitting and standing are so increasing that that
which is exciting is spreading is the continuing of engaging the whole
of that expression. It is rising and pervading. It has that to hear.

Waste not want not have a piece of carpet, use the laugh when longer use
it any time you go away. That is to say a heavy way to leave it all
alone is to use the time in every way.

A parcel. A parcel is the thing that when there is a heavy one is the
one that every one eating is not receiving. They were all there. They
each had that diversion. They came to have the time when they were not
accepting that string which was not there when the paper was not there.
They all had some of that intention.

Powdering a little pepper and neglecting that in the morning paper is
one way to begin the day. They were not all using either. They did not
have a lovely time.

Banking in the hope of a tradition and so there is no sound. A little
place to have a shoulder. A particle of eye and that which is there to
meet another is talking and telling what is not hushing. Any one can sit
down. There are not many chairs.

Pale pet, red pet, pink pet, blue pet, white pet, dark pet, real pet,
fresh pet, all the tingling is the weeding, the close pressing is the
tasting.

Have the hand browner. It is that color. It is not holding that
dimension. It is not changing in holding a black thing that is used for
anything.

Faithful and constant, never budge from her side. If there is a
direction there is not that clouding. A clearer and then the same that
made that picture makes a picture and there has been that change. There
is no use for that. A place is plain.

Kindly clean the whole surface when there is enough time and then when
the whole surface is clean, it does not shine because if shining were
anything that which is clean would not be shining. That is to say that
that which is clean is so clean.

The best place for all that which is warm is where there is enough to
give all.

A whole one is not so small when it is little. It sees all that beaming.
A target is all in the middle and it receives it most. That is a Sunday.

If the little that is not bigger has gone away it has not been there.
That is the way to complete pleasure. It is alright.

A touch of too much was not what was intended. It was intended to pay
that day. A different ending is not coming. The happiness is regarding
the little fitting that is not made for that and yet is on it nicely.
That is one hope. That is in the side place and is not there to stay. It
is to come here which is where there is the place underneath a
non-conductor.

The same thing is not changed and if he wont he will. That will be
enough and anyway all that will not be sent away where there is no room.
Certainly not.

The plainer the little letter that finishes a word is put where it is
seen, even if it is much smaller, has that meaning that a memory is not
forgotten and a progression comes to happen. That is that decision.

Anyway two are not the same, they have a way of hoping that if they are
there they are not disturbing. They do disturb if it is all the same.
That is hopeful. It is not a bitter day when the taste is sweet.

Largely additional and then completely exploding is one way to deny
authorisation. It is not the easiest way to get excited. The easier way
is to say that a decision has been changed. That is one way to make some
of that precise pleasure.

It is not alarming to be together if all that is in a little look is
what was what was expected and there is disappointment. Then there can
be that same particular repetition and surely any picture is pleasing.

It was not tranquil, that was not what made that little moisture, that
was not the change, there was not any change, there was walking. And if
there had come to be a place where there was enough use there would not
have been later that time and surely there will be so much that there is
not any distraction.

There is that and what there is is what is everywhere and there is
always the most.

All the part that was cold has the warm feeling and the least that is
pink is not purple and the presence of that relief is that all together
are not sorry. There could recommence but there will not be any
feeling. This is certain. There is all of a guaranty.

The presence of that shape in that head makes the act of passing some
hair there a great pleasure. It is so understood and the whole of the
pleasure is the same and there is a place that is thinner that is where
the hair is a beginner. It is a dark subject and the discussion makes it
blonder. The best way to feel the future is the celebration of the
evening. Every morning comes after. A disappointment is not foretold.

All the evening and the walking, all the passing of the living, all the
knowing of the living of the ones who are prospering, all the tender
pressing of the complete expression, all the exaggerating in
examination, all the actual decision, nothing is more than too much
then, there is all of that waiting and there is that one sleeping.

The rattle that is not in the room can talk some of the language that
rises. When it is pleasant to be important a question is as good as
answered.

A wave of the white and the black and all the precious substance that
which is the whole resemblance is so keen that it is the not in between,
it is the whole and there is laughing. The happy way is the way to color
the grey.

To put it there where there is no time to wait is the time that is not
chosen, it has been refused and given. All the result will be different
and all the satisfaction will be expressed.

The size that is wide and the length that is short and the gloves that
have stitching and the slippers that are where there is that position,
all this and there is curling when the hearing is in the earring, all
this and the outlining which is ermine, all this and the buckles
showing, all this is that intention and some expectation. The success is
recurring. All the pleasure is more.

What the time makes is no noise, what the time makes is that event.

The spread of the land is not skirted and the order is not shirted. The
harmless way is all day and the use of that change is that the voices
have that deadening. Any place has that symptom.

The littlest use is the cane that has no gold ball, it is all made of
the same and it is curving where there is a beginning. This does not
make beauty black, this makes beauty a beautiful color.

This is the time to say that a bath is not so clean when there is no
soap to be seen. A bath is clean when the bather has the wish to state
and is full-filling everything.

A way to spend the day is to give away the time to say that is not the
day that is to be used that way. Every day is to be used that way. That
is that installation.

Be the same complainer and then quarrel nicely, agree too arrange
speaking first and then dismiss the visitor, accept the late arrival of
the one who is there to say that he is welcome, disturb the time by not
coming to say good-by, that is one way of changing a dismal way.

To relieve the heat by saying that some one is neat is the way to have
winter come earlier and not stay later. All the pleasure of having been
telling what is the laughter when there is no spelling has come to be
drowned by the experience of one who has earned some changing of the
house she had been engaging. The pleasure of conquest is the same when
distraction has no limit. The quick way to say that beauty is not in the
way is the way that the one receiving the offering of adjusting all the
pleasure has all the sweetness of decision. Beauty is the thing to see
when beauty is there. Any little way is all that and the question is
answered. There is no choice.

To lift a plant and see it green this does mean that there is a plant
and green is more color than any other. A time to dress is the time it
takes after some one is frightened. Not at all, there will not be any
more and most directions are the directions to use in deciding to obey.
To obey nicely is something.

There are except the ribbon more than before, they are all there.
Blending is not a rose and pink is a color. The use of a pen that makes
ink show is the seasonable way to show pleasure. The union is perfect
and the border is expressing kissing. There is no more than that touch.
That comes altogether. To satisfy a message there needed to be a
dwindling and then altogether the horizon was met. The window is there.
The door is no more. The object is this.

Pardon the fretful autocrat who voices discontent. Pardon the colored
water-color which is burnt. Pardon the intoning of the heavy way. Pardon
the aristocrat who has not come to stay. Pardon the abuse which was
begun. Pardon the yellow egg which has run. Pardon nothing yet, pardon
what is wet, forget the opening now, and close the door again.

Say more and tell the use there is in listening. Exchange that and
receive a little spoon which is one of seven.

The occupation which makes the reason clear is so absorbing that a night
which is not any longer is discovered.

To please while there is no attention is one way when there is a way to
be older. This has many little interruptions and a kiss on both cheeks
is not in disorder.

A goose-girl is not a girl that geese regard and explain, a goose girl
is a real wonder. To sustain a breath is not so dignified as to laugh
longer and to do that with that wail is the principal task of more
plucking.

A card of time means that all that is shown sparkles. There is no way to
have it more than satin. The black and the white and the mixture which
is ermine is enchanting when there is more dress than linen. There is no
lining when the form is slender. There is every graceful date when the
hair is washed and there is no hairpin tickling. A little rubber would
not make it neater.

A lovely love is sitting and she sits there now she is in bed, she is in
bed. A lovely love is cleaner when she is so clean, she is so clean, she
is all mine. A ovely love does not use any way to say all day she is to
say that all the day is all there is to say. A lovely love is something
and there is no hand-writing, it is that there is no printing. A lovely
love is there to be the rest of all there is to put into that which is
what there is there.

When there is no astonishment there is that happening. To choose looking
at the appetising ending is not a sign of predisposition. It does not
defy accomplishment. It lingers there.

Not to rub away is to let it stay and surely that is neat and sweet. The
two which makes enough is what is that and the question is that it comes
in the morning.

A little expression of marrying means that and it succeeds in saluting.
This means something.

Why does that the one being there see that see that reflection, why,
because there is no separation and there is no talking when the time has
come for all more and there is that result of definite cooking which is
not to be forgotten while eating is that necessity in establishing not
drinking.

The celebration of the evening is not in settling an extraction that
will come out after walking. That is that necessity and using that is
the best proof. There is none.

Carpet sweeping is so timely and a comb would be useful if there was
poverty.

If the wading is so sweet and there is day-light then the time which
turned black grey and the earrings longer were the months that had that
time. All the pepper which has a color is the color that is so
articulate. There is the increase of more.

Astonishing is when there is no ring. Not astonishing this which is no
adaptation. All the color that is there shows that the company is
smaller. They see that and they put in some salt and some butter. This
is not to cause a quarrel. This is not to keep eating away.

Tail pieces and a doll, a covering that is blue and white, a cup and not
a mixture in it, darkness and sympathy, this does not mean that some one
has been afraid to stay away.

If the road-bed has no saw-dust and the water has no flour, if the money
has no butter and the conversation is successful then in some way we
will have a room and a bath and more. That is the way.

Please the spoons, the ones that are silver and have sugar and do not
make mischief later, do not ever say more than listening can explain.

Winter and the wet is on the apple, that means more handkerchief of any
color, the size is the same when the pillow is little. That is the way
to be conscious. A perfume is not neater.

All the size which is so slower when the figs are dry make the change
which is obtained with walking have the size which is that production.
The surface is not covered and a lighter brown is yellower. Any day can
be that. Singing is in vegetation. There is more green than potatoe.
That produces that result. Red is not needed but more helps than
another. Any little piece of fig is left.

Dark and slow and the little court is wrong as is the way when there are
so many and not a few are left. To bespeak that affection is to declare
no more.

All right away and so much where there is nothing empty, so much and
such a pretty color to shine often, there is no praise where the
pleasure is so precise and more than that there can be and the most is
black and another color.

A pen held by a pen holder does show more of that than most. It has been
some preparation and the talk is so interwoven.

A pale policeman has some contract and the nice way is to say that the
darkness is in the cape. All the particle of peril is shown in that
gleam.

A cushion has no pretty color. A white surface has that meaning and two
are seen and the present is the same.

Charming the messenger and kissing the footstool, seasoning the
grape-juice and coloring the rose stalk, the danger to the minute is the
time of day.

Wednesday, the sender who wants no coins away, Tuesday the use of a push
that does not paralyse the rubbing, all day, the resemblance to no
blame, Sunday a movement of a little water. Persons with a face and no
spitting. Alluding to a fresh man shows no signs of wear. That is the
meaning of a measure. There is every remains of a trace.

Climbing the same division with a haughty lady does seem no more
monstrous than the return of a colored hat. There is no choice when the
head is everywhere, none whatever and the same thing would be so
changeable if the hair were made of that silk. If the little one were
that size and she is then the round spot would be alike and it was not.
So there must be some regret. There was.

Say the difference, say it in the brook, say it in the perpendicular
horizon, say it in the retreat from St. Petersburg.

The tame coffee is not so stern as the singing of swinging. The brown
complete has a tall leader and the distance is seen and is not safer.
There is no loss of mud and the collar is lower.

Little lingering and lantern lighting is the pleasant sing song and sing
song is singing and the wish is more than any father it is the whole
pressure of the little and the big which comes the way singing has
whispering and so and the blanket is not so regular as every sheet and
not more neat not any more neat.

Peas and green peas and surely cooked, there was a difference, a simple
sample did cause that description. So then we conclude that if there is
food there is no higher place and nothing deranged and the necessity the
whole necessity is there, there is material.

Little leg of mutton always still and true, little long potatoe is so
like the green, little celery eaten, shows the time of day, little
rhubarb is all red and still there is a last time to discuss a matter,
little piece of pudding is not very red, little piece of fish fried is
the same as bread, little pieces of it are the bread there is, each one
is all happy and there is no time for pears. Pears are often eaten, figs
have such a way, all the time is better and this shows in that way, all
the best is certain and there is that use, when there is no time to stay
there will be no abuse. All the time is there then, there is time to
stay, all the best is mentioned most and there is more to say, all the
length is thickness, all the length is breadth, talking is a pleasant
way and there is not enough, more is not permitted, there is meaning
there, all is in that particular time there is the meaning clear.

Leave the peculiar people here who have the love of any day, leave them
stay and sit and have the open seat filled up with fire, this makes
merriment and an afternoon.

Marking the smiling of a beer does show the happy cloth that is here,
asking the time of opening doors does make the noise grow louder.

Bake the little stay away, and choose the apple every day, place the
thing with it and sing it well and nicely there will come all that. This
means that there is all that there and there is more than is obliged,
choosing that is the way all is best and light in color is the most.

All the dearest children say that they may, they do not say all the
words any day, they say they hear that it is where there is no happening
that the conviction is deepening. They say it.

To begin the hymn there is a word there, four makes the whole completer.
An excess is refined. That is so likely.

Biting a piece of a sample and refusing a piece of a laugh and learning
a longer refusal and soiling every seat is not the way to follow a
preceder.

The whole is so much that there is a half, there is more than a house
there is a larger room. This gave the whole thing a beginning.

Taming more that is large and shouting minus a sight is not a
disappointment not at all when breathing has no temperature.

All the pudding has the same flow and the sauce is painful, the tunes
are played, the crinkling paper is burning, the pot has a cover and the
standard is excellence. So the pig is painful and the red is never
white. A little lamb is not more than every sheep and any flavor. The
order is so filled with hope that there is no distress.

So kindly and so shiningly and with a special temperature, so far and
here and always there and all interpretation holding the place of all
decision. There is no use in saying Madame. An open face has hair, it
can have it so.

In more winding there is glass and in a sound there is a swing. Any time
to do it different means a change in every second, the seconds are the
same.

Pleasure in onions means that gambling has no milk. That is what has
come to remain away. The time of the pansy is so original.

The spoon, the spoon, that weight, a closet, a plate and all of the
chase that makes silver so killing, a whole temper is sustained and the
noon has more place than daylight. All the happy day is that way. A
question is answer.

A lamp and trimming and the description of the children and the certain
indigestion when the reason is not thrilling. So then the time comes
when some one has to stay.

All the temper which shows that there must not be that meaning shows no
more than is forgotten. Hoping anything is hoping that that is a
lesson. Not hoping does not show more memory than there is fact. There
is no fact.

More mining than pedestrianism and more hot water bottling does mean
that cheapness is something and nothing is subdued. More shows the place
and feathers are neglected for more winter and surely steam is
something, it surely has no way to make a house change the river, really
not any way.

Please the locksmith and the price and throw the cushion on the floor
and make a little piece of butter show more strength than any orange.
All of it together make the sun and the change is delightful. There is
no moon. Cats see that. They can misuse a piece of surrounding moss.

Pale and paling, all the octoroon has some color. A chocolate is not
sweet if it is not vanilla. It is a sweet taste and the mouth is bigger.
It eats more. It is not annoyed with pink powder. It is not annoyed any
more. Containing contradictions makes a melon sour. A melon has no use
for such a color. It has no unrest.

To climb and shine and to decline, to sink and save and have the water
pour, all this and more, there is no sight that has not every vestige
sold in pieces. There is no interval between mentioning. There is a
tropical misuse. There is the same. There are many there more.

The two shouting are not about. They have the coil in their hair. All
hair is idle. There is no medicine.

Like no sheep and like a lamb, there is no meat, there is a sheet. Like
a church and like a tape there are circles there, there is a hidden
chair.

All the day that the print discloses is that which causes the circle. A
feeling is nice.

By the little piece of string, by the ocean travel, by the whole thing
dwindling, by the recitation, by the actual counting there are things to
doubt, there are more exaggerations there than there is a twinkling
bucket. So the decision has that vellum syncopation. A blind bed bite is
thunder struck.

Please tell the artichoke to underestimate valor. Change is made in the
book-trade.

Lay the end left and put the tooth next, spice the same handkerchief and
season the tomato, it is no use to be silly and if there is spoiling why
should an atlas show that. It does, that is what makes it a journey.

To mention that the sound a piece is all in the same bosom. So then.

Present the time and section the sailing of a coat. Show no theory. Show
the satisfaction and see the window. All the gentleness is mixing. There
is a dream.

All the rest is burned. There is no auction.

Then the singing is dirty and silence is louder. Then there is a
dwelling. There is mingling in a cushion. The pet is particular. It sees
silkiness in sulking. It is so delighted. It is a wonder.

Aim to please and tend to save, show the honor of the tripe, squeeze the
whole pen wiper close, show the arc light where to choose, see the cable
leave the ton, show it the face merrily, there is rousing in the cake
there is a bite in the plain pin, there is no more disgrace than there
is. There certainly is not.

Alright, show more, show it broadly, show it so that if there is a
dispute, if there is any reason to fear more than the most there will be
the time to say more and to say it very nicely. This is the reason given
for shaken a cream pitcher. Surely there is that much certainly.

A dirty bath is so clean that there is eyesight. A sponge, a crack in
soap, all that makes nails longer. It does and yet if there is no change
of name there is an example. Names are mingling.

Names are mingling and the surprise is not official. It is recorded and
a nightingale is a song. A song is pretty nearly more. It is singing.

Please utter that change three times and then what happens, it happens
and the whole little taste is so winking that there is no light. There
is night. There is night light, there is pink light, there is midnight.
All the chief occupations are in the checked dress. This is made of
curtains and calico and rhodedendrons and kindling wood and even of some
gauze. This is so soon summer.

All of it is in a hat. A hat is yellow. If a hat is that color why
should sleeves be shorter. If sleeves are shorter why is a dress yellow.
There is an answer.

A blade and a setting that has the colors of a simple sample of right
resolution is so sweet that there is a precious saying.

I and y and a d and a letter makes a change. The obligation is mutual.
Will the pieces widen. If they do then thickness is increasing. A
caution, that makes midnight. A cake, that makes squeezing. If there is
reading and recollection is tall and the time that has light has made
the night, if there is reading and a recollection makes arithmetic, then
a memory has no choice, it remembers nothing, it remembers more, it
enlarges satisfaction. Is satisfaction suspicion, it is there, it is in
peace. All the time is sweeping. All that and more. No use is more
hindered than a smelling cover. That is so neat and particular. All the
same there is no answer.

Smell is not a wall. So small and so drunk from a well. A wink is not
somber. So fine and there is no time. Patience means curls.

A patent is not the same thing as no place to lay down in a room. This
does show that something is bought. The means to station a chair in a
place is so made that the feet are covered. A little of feet does not
make any difference. There is no interpretation.

Light as a spoon and no duller and some silver and a spilling of a whole
assortment of cheese this does make the suggestion that not touching is
not everything.

Candy is lively. The kindness of smelling. That last scent is lingering.
If the precious thing is ripe it has been washed. Smelling is not
patient. It is reduced and remembered.

The sign, the left and the laugh, all the tangle, the length of light,
piece the pressing, to be near and that graciously makes hindering
gracious in sleeping. The sent hindering is attacking clinging. The
closeness is thin request.

Wipe no more and pillow the time to rise, wipe in and have no shutter,
weigh and rest more in the middle, protect the top, hold all
principally.

Dimmer than a demand of a dance in the surrounding depreciation. And
then than whom is the pleasure. A life was sardine to play. A land was
thinner. Than which side was tacit. The noise was a pimple. A convex is
not hurtled.

So the same solid slice shows the use of that. It was not right. If
there was the occasion then surely there should be the sanction. And why
if there is no chance should there be no refusal. Because if the place
is there, there are the times. More does not make that difference. There
will not be.

A turn in the place and smelling is sticking, the section that is is not
unsatisfactory. To begin to be plain. To begin to be plain is a plain
duty. The right to be plain is a plain right. The resumption of being
plain is the resuming being plain. There is a conviction and a
satisfaction and a resemblance between blue houses and blue horizon.

A private life is the long thick tree and the private life is the life
for me. A tree which is thick is a tree which is thick. A life which is
private is not what there is. All the times that come are the times I
sing, all the singing I sing are the tunes I sing. I sing and I sing and
the tunes I sing are what are tunes if they come and I sing. I sing I
sing.

A lovely night to stay awake and smell the cake and masticate. A lovely
night and no need of surprises, that is what makes it so free of noises.

He came and said he had fried it hard and he had and we smelled it and
it was as he did not say it was, it was chewy and it was made as it was
made and if there was no hesitation there was no refusal. Could it be
true that there was meaning in there being no refusal. Very likely it
was not true that there was meaning in there not being refusal.

A curious little thing is that a substantial piece of cauliflower shows
in the nose and shows so well that there is no smell. A very curious
thing is that a whole name means no more than if there is success, not a
bit more place is used by those using more than by those receiving
company. It makes every one glad to see the genius and the energy and
the simple way that a thing is put down. Why is there any reason that
there should be hesitation. Is it necessary that one seeing the time not
wasted should arrange that there is no more fatigue. Is it singular that
the afternoon and the evening follow the morning. Does follow mean
coming after and why if it does, why is there no reason. It is not
especial that no more reason is curious than a large picture. A single
moment and no catastrophe does show that care makes any one nervous.
There is no time to use speed. The promise will be kept and sometime any
little word will be the one written.

Once upon a time when there was a word which went there once upon a time
there was a pillow. A pillow is not whiter when there is a moon than it
is when there is paper. Once when there was more extravagance than there
is blaming once there was a door and that was made of white lining. This
had under it what did not disappoint a chicken. This is not industry it
is regularity.

Four sses are not singular. Four sses are not at all singular and the
fashion which is changing shows itself then, it shows in there being
four and many more, it shows itself in blame, in expectation, in direct
appeal, in singular ways of establishing a result, in certain very
particular investigations and hopes and determinations and even it does
even sometimes show itself in audacity and in endearments. All the time
that this is happening there is result and anticipation.

The faithful prosecution of an intermediate expression between
obligation and restraint and reverberation is such that the mornings
could be used.

To go into the mud and spill potatoes, to go into the water and pick up
water, to go everywhere and wash a petunia, this is a disgrace, it is
such a disgrace that there is no meaning in closing and yet, why forget,
when to forget is one thing, which to forget is something, the simple
time to select a new example is in the same way. This happened and the
end of it all was that any way there was no reason why any establishment
should have a way to pray. This did not mean that there was any reason
in eye sight, this means simply that the whole thing is not any of the
appurtenance of the register. The time when that is mentioned. The time
how, that is mentioned. All the time there is mentioned that the list is
long.

A dot in the center and that which is proportioned if it is made of
lead, if it is easily made is so impressionable. There is no greater
satisfaction than in everything.

A baker had a basket and a basket was bigger, there is no baker and a
basket is bigger, there is no wax and there is an impression and
certainly very certainly there is proportion.

A beggar who begs and a print which prints, a surface which heats and a
smoke which smokes, all this makes silver and gold is not cheaper not so
much cheaper that there is no clatter. All the conscience which tells
that little tongue to tickle is the one that does not refer to teeth. To
remember, to forget, to silence all the mistakes, to cause perfection
and indignation and to be sweet smelling, to fasten a splendid ulster
and to reduce expenses, all this makes no charge, it does not even make
wine, it makes the whole thing incontestable. The doctrine which changed
language was this, this is the dentition, the doctrine which changed
that language was this, it was the language segregating. This which is
an indication of more than anything else does not prove it. There is no
passion. A little tiny piece of stamp, a little search for whiting, a
little search for more and more does not disturb the resting.

A liking that has teeth that show it are the same as a smile and the
candle is clean, it is clean if there is obedience, it is clean if there
is hot water and no soap, it is clean, it is so clean that there is no
open top, this does not make wind, it does not make china, it does not
even make a remainder and then the deplorable difficulty, why is there
no deplorable difficulty, there is and there is an excuse, there is the
best fence in the water, this does make no distress, surely there is no
reason why it should, surely it does and then there would be a center,
in all ways there is a resemblance.

Why does a little one like a middle sized one, why does a little one
mention everything. A little one mentions everything because in
mentioning a middle sized one the little one is mentioning everything.

When does a middle sized one mention mentioning anything, a middle sized
one mentions mentioning everything when a middle sized one mentions
anything. A middle sized one is mentioning mentioning everything. A
middle sized one does not sin, that means that a middle sized one
mentions anything and mentions mentioning everything in mentioning
anything. Anything is everything. Middle size is mentioning everything.

A quiet thought in a lively example shows that chalk, any chalk makes a
mark and it also shows that the middle is the same distance between two
birds. How dark all this shows in green and brown and yet white real
white is cream.

A curve, a curve is that angle which determines the recognition of the
center in relation to the gathering extension, a curve is that result
which is disturbing the roundness that is not redder. The center the
whole center is a flower and being a flaming flower does not mean that
there is a shadow, it means just watering and winking and wading and
rearranging, it means just that exactly.

Life on the Mississippi and in Missouri, life is that which when
undertaken is not bashful. Why should it be bashful. Suppose there comes
the time which shows that there was a difference, is this any disgrace,
does this make pride, it does not make pride but it does make secretion,
and what is secretion, secretion is that amusement which every little
mark shows as merit. A mark is very necessary. Suppose there is a mark
well then there is a mark.

All the mark comes, all the mark is, all there is is a mark, all there
comes comes to mark, a mark has that character and that price, a likely
price a completely likely price.

Not seasoning a turnip, this does make a story, it makes this story, it
tells how what is just alike has no difference. The patience for that is
not denied.

Daylight is measured by there being a dinner a staple sobriety and a
wise widow. Day-light is not meant by the evening and too much
repetition.

A feather, what is a feather, a feather is restraint, and this shows in
yellow, it does not show in every color.

Why is there white which is creamy, there is white which is creamy
because it is necessary.

The whole cabinet shows that uselessness is not tearful. No excitement
is necessary, it is sadness that is eaten.

A window and a wife, a chair and a stable, all very likely to be in the
habit of extracting precise results. This is so manifest, it is so
precious and perfect.

A plain light, what is a plain light a plain light is twinkling. Is
there any credit given when there is a frog, there is not. All the same
it is very good to be busy, to be gracious and to be religious, it is
very good to be grand and disturbed and exchanging, a sign of energy is
in a soup, is there no sign of energy. There is a little joke in all the
mice, there is a little tenderness in soup, there is a plant, there is a
coat, there are seven dresses to see, there is no doubt any choice in
that, there is certainly a single obligation for a hat, there is no
doubt that there is no curve, no curve, at all to a shape, there is no
doubt that something has that way.

Climate is not a color. A little thing is a color. When to discover and
when to disturb and when to lead a rock away all this is known and no
disgrace.


Can a question be clear. Can a pin be a shape. Can a length be
different.

Two, two are not more than one when there is a dress. This is no
obstacle. To begin the dress, supposing there is that and there is a
process, the thing to do is to determine who is the one that shows it
all. This is not determined because there is activity. There being
activity there is beauty. There being beauty all the pins are changed.
So late there can be no beginning and yet it was all done. How was it
done, it was done by one.

Half a sausage, a whole sausage, two sausages, more sausages, four
sausages, this with a little mixed sour, this and the rest and the corn
which is grain, this and the best and certainly no kind of way of saying
that it was unexpected, this completed the single selection of a curtain
of repetition. This was such a security.

Argue the earnest cake and the dirty inside blotter, argue it and sign
the best way of standing. Supposing fifty are nineteenthirteen,
supposing they are is that the reason that the trimmings are shorter.
Why any wonder when the color of the sand is so dark and raisins are fig
trees and apples are smarter.

Why is the illusion correct, it is correct because it is black and gold.

Why are little squares neater, they are neat because if they are
obstructed there is a result that is pretty, very pretty and very likely
there is the color.

Pin a little pin inside each muff, show the slant that should expose a
foot, serve the same thing that has seen enough, love the moment best
which is all bliss. A mighty circle and a clean retreat, a master piece
and any fist you please, all this and collusion, was there ever a sign.
There was it showed that the back like the front has a middle. It does
not deceive plaster, it does not arouse a rose.

Cease carpeting, cease carpeting and what happens, the same thing
happens and there is silence and there is water and there is a rush of
the same fire that showed in the other stove.

If the white which is white and the green which is green mixed with the
brown which is brown shows no sign of the expectation that does not
disappoint expectation, if it does not then is there news, there is
news. A lamb has no neigh, a chicken has breeding, a circus has an
object and the best is to be done. The very best is to be done, it is to
be done and the example the very example shows no steel, it shows no
steel and it shows no selfishness and success, it shows just what there
is which is all that necessarily.

The darkness does not mean light ways and single noises it just means
that there certainly will be success and a serious remedy, it means that
pins any pins are a quantity, it means that a whole proceeding is
necessary and outlined and that a list a whole list means no more
disturbance than a masterpiece.

An argument is seen in a hurry, why is there no danger in advice, and in
a point and in a single exchange of generosity, why is there even no
danger in a return and an investment and in electing a single side of
clock making, why is there no more danger in a curtain and a silence and
a hasty spilling of the milk and maple sugar and the rest of it all. Why
is there no danger and why when there is a cottage why is there anything
hasty in asking for nothing and not staying longer. Why is there no
danger in an attitude and in the certainty of tea and bread and butter.
Why is there no danger.

Lecture, lecture a hat and say it is a cat, say it is a lively
description, say that there is collusion, to say this and say it
sweetly, to say this and make alike service and a platter, to do this is
horrid and yet when does kindness fail.

An alarm a study and dragged alarm is splendid. It is shocking and a
disgrace. It is a garment in disposition.

Boiling what is boiling, currants are boiling and india rubber and more
negligence and certainly a dress too and more likely a coat and a head
dress and a sight of shoes. Very likely all of this is boiling and very
likely there is nothing hot, nothing is so hot that there is any way to
choose.

If there is a piece to part is there any lighter part is there when the
fat is thinner, is there when the moths are slimmer, is there any way no
table when there is and where there is. This is not in the interest of
the pins nor really in the interest of white thread nor indeed in the
interest of the afternoon or the morning, it is not in any interest, it
will cause slippers. This is cute.

Explain a curve, a curve is that angle which placing a line there shows
a regular chance to be fitting. This is so boastful.

A little occasion shows no twisting and real politeness, politeness
shows credit and earrings and even large feet, it even shows a sample.
This is so much more like what it is.

Once upon a time there was a reverence for bleeding, at this time there
was no search for what came. That which was winsome was unwinding and a
clutter a single clutter showed the black white. It was so cautious and
the reason why was that it was clear there had been here. All this was
mightily stirring and littleness any littleness was engaged in spilling.
Was there enough there was. Who was the shadow.

The rest was left and all the language of thirty was in the truth. This
made it choose just that establishment. Consume apples and there is no
cider. Drink beer and be ready later. Snug and warm is the chin and arm,
struggle and sneeze is the nose and the cheese, silent and grey is the
dress near the bay, wet and close is the sash they chose. A likeness and
no vacation. A regularity and obedience. Congratulations.

There is no truth in the decision which is in the center. When the
center is not in a line but in a circle a tub, a whole tub is necessary.
The sorrow is not satisfied by the moon and motion, it is urged to be
strong and to save a specimen.


A single noise, reddening is distressing, a single noise, blue is no
mystery, a single noise, loving dissimulating, a single noise,
completely correcting.

A practice, no practice is careless, a loud practice, no practice is
silent, a wild practice, no practice is perfect.

She said that she did not do it and she did do it, she did it so that
the same page was not copied and the same book was not lost and the same
sayer would be spoken.

A line is the presence of a particular sugar that is not sugary but
splendid and so bland, so little and so rich, so learned and so
particular, so perfectly sanguine and so reared.

To indicate more wall flowers than there is paper, to indicate more
houses than there are houses, to indicate nothing more is not an urgent
and particular privilege, it is selected and if it is not wanted is
there any reason for losing anything. There is what there is by the
raking of the felt hats.

Does anybody think so, does anybody think so. Does anybody think so in
the future. Does anybody think so. Does anybody think so.

Does anybody think that the turn and the break and the lavender and the
currants and the hot cocoanut altogether is a wonderful mixture. Does
anybody think so.

Tune, a tune is in the hurt way there is no mountain. There comes to be,
there comes to be, there is an exchange of that taste. Sweetness is no
reason. Results are strained.

If a length and it is there is not covered by where there is a section
then is there no use in a foot. There is, there is.

An addition, suppose it is more on the beach is that the time to reach
more and is there any more likely. If there is there is no can late.

A real red intoxication and no perspiring blaze not even a silk hat, is
there no stranger showing, is there not a selection. The pleasantest
elegance is in a collar, it is and there is the red exactness that shows
color and no such light.

Which is in the dish there is yellow and the white and all the sleep,
all the variegation lying makes the best as in the grate. Sound the
goose and if in shining ees are all the wealth between, if there is a
right and roaming, if the left has all that team, if it has and roaming
roaming lectures all that and makes mines, why is silentsses inner when
there is the seldom roar. All the use is humorous.

A bird is birdie. A little bird and a little blight and a little balance
to a best button. A little bright bitten bucking anything.

Cunning to eat, circular to baste, splendid to chew, solemn to drink,
surprising to assemble and more opportunely.

Bud what is a bud, a bud is not busted. What is a bud. A bud is a
sample. A bud is not that piece of room and more, a bud is ancient.

Class a plain white suit as a fairy turtle, class an amazing black cup
as an hour glass, class a single relief as a nut cracker, show the best
table as a piece of statuary.

Suppose it did, suppose it did with a sheet and a shadow and a silver
set of water, suppose it did.

Beef yet, beef and beef and beef. Beef yet, beef yet.

Water crowd and sugar paint, water and the paint.

Wet weather, wet pen, a black old tiger skin, a shut in shout and a
negro coin and the best behind and the sun to shine.

A whole cow and a little piece of cheese, a whole cow openly.

A cousin to a cow, a real cow has wheels, it has turns it has eruptions,
it has the place to sit.

A wedding glance is satisfactory. Was the little thing a goat.

A, open, Open.

Leaves of hair which pretty prune makes a plate of care which sees seas
leave perfect set. A politeness.

Call me ellis, call me it in a little speech and never say it is all
polled, do not say so.

Does it does it weigh. Ten and then. Leave off grass. A little butter
closer. Hopes hat.

Listen to say that tooth which narrow and lean makes it so best that
dainty is delicate and least mouth is in between, what, sue sense.

Little beef, little beef sticking, hair please, hair please.

No but no but butter.

Coo cow, coo coo coo.

Coo cow leaves of grips nicely.

It is no change. It is ordinary. Not yesterday. Needless, needless to
call extra. Coo Coo Coo Cow.

Leave love, leave love let.

No no, not it a line not it tailing, tailing in, not it in.

Hear it, hear it, hear it.

Notes. Notes change hay, change hey day. Notes change a least apt apple,
apt hill, all hill, a screen table, sofa, sophia.

Ba but, I promise, I promise that that what what is chased is chased big
and cannily and little little is big too big best.

No price list, no price list, a price-list, a price and list and so
collected, so collected pipe, all one cooler, a little apple needs a
hose a little nose is colored, a little apple and a chest, a pig is in
the sneezing, no blotter, raised ahead.

I promise that there is that.

The hour when the seal up shows slobber. Does this mean goat. It does
yes.

Be a cool purpose and a less collection and more smell more smell.

Leave smell well.

Leaves in oats and carrots and curve pets and leaves and pick it ferns
and never necessary belts.

Little b and a a coat, little b and a a cat, little b and a coat cat,
little be cat, little be coat little be and cat and cut and hat, little
be and hat and a pear and a pear, little b and a pear and a coat, little
be and a coat and grape cat grape cat, little b and a coat grape cat,
little be and a cat pear coat hat grape, little grape and a coat grape
cat, little coat and a pear and a hat grape coat, little pear and a be
at hat, pear.

Leaves, that is leave, that is look in 6 pieces, six pieces and a
kitchen, a kitchen when, in guarding, in guarding what, a kitchen. All I
say is begin.

A lake particular salad.

Wet cress has points in a plant when new sand is a particular.

Frank, frank quay.

Set of keys was, was.

Lead kind in soap, lead kind in soap sew up. Lead kind in so up. Lead
kind in so up.

Leaves a mass, so mean. No shows. Leaves a mass cool will. Leaves a mass
puddle.

Etching. Etching a chief, none plush.




MANY MANY WOMEN




Any one is one having been that one. Any one is such a one.

Any one having been that one is one remembering something of such a
thing, is one remembering having been that one.

Each one having been one is being one having been that one. Each one
having been one is remembering something of this thing, is remembering
something of having been that one.

Each one is one. Each one has been one. Each one being one, each one
having been one is remembering something of that thing.

Each one is one. Each one has been one. Each one is remembering that
thing.

Each one is one. Each one has been one. That is something that any one
having been one, any one being one is having happen. Each one being one
is having it happen that that one is being that one. Each one having
been one is one having had it happen that that one has been that one.

Each one is one. Any one is the one that one is. Each one is one.

One who is one is remembering that she is one forgetting anything. One
who is one is remembering that she is forgetting everything again and
again. She is remembering this thing. She is not interested in this
thing. She is remembering this thing and she is remembering that this is
a quite necessary thing, it is quite a necessary thing that she is
remembering that she is forgetting anything.

She is forgetting anything. This is not a disturbing thing, this is not
a distressing thing, this is not an important thing. She is forgetting
anything and she is remembering that thing, she is remembering that she
is forgetting anything.

She is one being one remembering that she is forgetting anything. She
is one not objecting to being one remembering that thing, remembering
that she is forgetting anything. She is one objecting to there being
some objecting to being ones forgetting anything. She is one objecting
to any one being one remembering that they are not forgetting anything.
She is one objecting to any one objecting to her being one forgetting
anything. She is not one remembering being one objecting to any one
objecting to her being one forgetting anything. She is one remembering
that she is one objecting to being one remembering that they are not
forgetting anything. She is one remembering something of being one
objecting to some being one objecting to forgetting anything.

She is one forgetting anything. She is one remembering something of this
thing. She is one repeating this thing repeating remembering something
of forgetting anything.

She is one remembering that she has been having something. She is one
remembering something of this thing. She has been having something, she
is having something, she is remembering something of this thing. She is
not objecting to having something, she is having something, she is
remembering something of this thing.

She is one being that one being one having something and remembering
something of that thing. She is one being one and she is forgetting
anything and she is remembering being one forgetting anything.

Any one she is kissing is one she is kissing then, not kissing again and
again, not kissing and kissing, any one she is kissing is one she kissed
then, is one she did kiss then, one she kissed some then.

Any one she is kissing is one needing something then, needing kissing,
needing anything just then, needing some kissing then. Any one she is
kissing is one having been kissed then, having been kissed some then and
she was the one who was kissing that one some just then. Any one she was
kissing was one whom she was kissing just then. Any one she was kissing
was one who might have been needing something then, needing anything
then, needing kissing then, needing a little kissing then, needing any
kissing then, needing something then, needing kissing then.

She was one living and remembering that she had enough for this thing,
enough for living. She was one remembering that she had enough for being
living and she was remembering that she could always be needing that
thing needing having enough to be living. She could remembering to
remind herself and any one of this thing, she could remember that thing,
she could remember to be reminded of that thing. She could remember to
be one reminding herself, she could remember to be one having any one
remind her quite often of this thing that she could remember that she
had enough and would be always having enough to be living. She could
remembering that she was needing this thing needing having enough always
enough for living. She could remember enough of reminding any one of
this thing. She could remember this thing remember reminding herself of
this thing. She could remember something of being reminded of this
thing. She could remember this thing, she could remember a good deal of
knowing that she was having enough for being living and that she could
always be needing having enough for living. She could remember this
thing, she could quite remember that thing.

She was one forgetting anything. She was remembering something of that
thing of forgetting anything. She could always remember something of
that thing, remember something of forgetting anything.

In giving she was giving what she had then remembered to give then. In
giving she was going to be giving. In giving she was quite often giving
something. In giving she was not scolding any one. In giving she
sometimes remembered that she was going to give that which she would
give. In giving she was forgetting that thing the thing she was giving.

In giving she was remembering that she would be one being living. In
giving she remembered something of being one needing something in being
one being living. In giving she almost remembered she had enough for
going on being living. In giving she was one forgetting that thing, the
thing she was giving. In giving she was being one remembering something.
In giving she was beginning again and again.

She was lonesome. She was not remembering all of this thing. She was not
ever remembering everything of being lonesome. She was lonesome, she was
not regretting this thing, she was not expecting anything from that
thing, from being lonesome. She was not expecting anything in being
lonesome. She was lonesome and she was not interested in the thing in
being lonesome, she was not interested in not expecting anything from
being lonesome. She was lonesome and was always knowing all any one
could know about that thing about her being lonesome. She was lonesome
and was remembering all there was to remember of the thing of her being
lonesome.

She was lonesome and that was not coming to be something. Being lonesome
was not coming to be anything. She was remembering enough of that thing
that being lonesome was not coming to be something. She was lonesome
and she was not using that thing in remembering being lonesome, she was
not using very much then. She was lonesome and she remembered enough
about that thing and she would be lonesome and she would be remembering
all she was remembering about that thing. She was lonesome and
forgetting anything and remembering something of forgetting everything.

In remembering forgetting something not anything was something she was
needing in being then that one. She was not using anything for any such
thing for remembering, for forgetting anything. She was often using
something. She was not one forgetting, she was not one remembering
having been using that thing. She was using things and forgetting then
something and remembering then something and she was not using that
thing in being then that one one remembering something, one forgetting
anything. She was using anything she was having then to be something she
might be using then. She was not remembering, she was not forgetting
then to be one having been using, being using that thing.

She was going on being one using, having been using something and being
then not one using anything in being that one, one forgetting anything,
one remembering that thing remembering forgetting anything.

Why should not any one be certain that any one is one any one could be
liking and that every one are ones being completely foolish ones in
being ones being any one. Why should not any one be repeating something
of some such thing, repeating quite often that any one is one any one is
liking and that every one is one being a quite foolish one. Why should
not any one be one saying some such thing.

She was remembering quite remembering that any one was a one any one
could be liking well enough for anything and she was remembering and
saying some such thing that every one is a foolish enough one and that
very many are being ones being living.

She was saying this thing and any one could come to be one being certain
that she was quite saying that any one is one any one can be liking in
being one being living and that every one is one being a silly one in
being that one. Why should not any one come to be hearing her saying
this thing, quite saying this thing. She was not saying this thing and
saying anything in saying this thing. She was saying this thing and any
one could be one saying this thing, saying something of this thing,
almost quite saying that thing.

In paying anything she was not worrying. In paying for anything she was
not worrying. She had worried some. She was always worrying. In paying
for anything she was not needing to be paying then. She was not knowing
that thing, she was always worrying. She was paying for anything. She
could have been one not paying for anything if she had not been one
paying for everything. She did pay for something and then she paid for
another thing. She was always worrying. She paid for very many things.
She always was paying for something. She was always worrying. She was
not paying for anything and certainly she did pay for everything and
there were very many things that she was needing to be one paying for
and she paid for them and she was always worrying and she was quite
putting off then paying and she did then pay for something and sometime
she paid everything and she was being one knowing this thing that she
could pay for everything. She was needing almost everything and was
paying then and worrying then and paying a little again and again.

She was feeding something. She was one feeding that thing, feeding being
one knowing something. She was feeding something in feeding that thing.
She was really feeding something. In feeding that thing she was not
beginning. She was not beginning in feeding. She was not beginning, she
was feeding something. She was knowing that she was one who was not
beginning feeding something, she was not remembering any such thing as
feeding something, she was not forgetting any such thing as feeding
something. She was feeding something. She was not beginning. She was
going on in that thing in feeding something. She was one feeding that
thing feeding being one knowing something.

She was one knowing something of feeding knowing something. She was
feeding on feeding knowing something, on feeding in this thing. She was
not one forgetting everything. She was not one remembering anything.

She was one loving. She was one being loved then. She was one loving in
being loved and was loving then. She was one loving then. She was one
loved then. Loving is a thing that was happening some then. She was
loving then, she was loved then.

Any one doing that thing doing loving is doing something of that thing,
something of doing loving. She was loving some one and some one was
loving her then. Both of them were loving then. They went on both of
them doing something of that thing of loving. She was loving and she was
content in doing that thing, and she was remembering that thing
remembering doing loving, and she did not forget everything of being
content in that thing in being loving. She was loving, she was
remembering being content in doing some loving. She was loving, she was
doing something of that thing. She was needing being content in being
loving. She remembered something of that thing of needing being content
in being loving. She forgot something, she forgot some of the things she
was liking in loving. She did not remember anything of forgetting things
she was liking in loving. She remembered something of needing being
content in being loving. She was loving some and she was remembering
that thing, remembering that she was loving some.

This one is one and she is that one. Each one is one. There are many.
Each one is different from any other one.

Each one is one. There are many. Some of them are loving. Some of them
are completely loving. One of them is completely loving. This one is
living in loving being existing in that one and loving is existing in
that one, completely existing in that one. That one is loving and is
completely existing in loving being completely existing in that one and
in the one that one is loving and in that one who is the one loving that
one. This one is one completely existing as loving is completely
existing in that one and one other one.

Each one is one. There are many of them. Each one is different from any
other one of them. Each one is one being living. Some are ones loving.
Some are ones believing in loving. Some are ones believing in loving and
marrying and having children. Some of such of them are ones believing in
working and believing in every one. Some of such of them are ones
working and getting sick then and going on believing in everything in
which they have been believing. One being such a one was one loving. She
was one believing in something, she was one believing in working and
marrying and having children and believing in all that she had been
believing. She believed in changing in some things. She believed in
something. She was loving. She was working. She was marrying. She was
having children. She was believing in all she had been believing. She
was one believing in something. She was a sick one. She believed then in
what she had been believing.

She could be certain that she could be content to let some go on doing
what they were doing. She was certain she could be content to have some
come to be doing other things than the things they were doing. She did
come to be certain that she could wait for something, for any one to go
on doing what they were doing, for some to come to be doing some other
thing than the thing they were doing.

She was one having children. She did have three of them. She was one
working. She got sick then. She was one beginning again working. She was
one then coming to be completely a sick one. She was one then believing
what she had been believing.

She was one loving, she was one marrying. She was one believing in
something and she went on believing in that thing. She went on believing
in all she had been believing.

In living she was believing in that thing believing in doing that
loving. She was believing that not anything was changing in being one
being loving. She went on believing that thing. She changed her mind
some.

She was loving and she was certain that any one doing that thing any one
loving was the one not doing that thing not doing anything for loving.
She went on believing that thing. She changed her mind some about some
little things. She was loving and she was marrying and she was sick then
and she had three children and she believed in everything in which she
had always been believing. She had always been believing in working, she
believing in that thing. She had always been believing that loving and
marrying and having children was something that was happening, she
believed in believing that thing. She believed that in doing anything
nothing was changing, she believed that in arranging living any one
would do that thing would arrange the living they were believing in. She
went on believing in the things in which she was believing. She changed
her mind about some little things and she said then that she had changed
her decision. She believed in that thing she believed in working and
marrying and having children and in believing in the things in which she
had been believing.

She was working and loving then and marrying and being sick then and
working and having children and being sick then and she was believing
then in the things in which she had been, in which she was believing.

Each one is one there are many of them. Some are liking what they are
doing. Some are completely liking what they are doing. Some are loving
and are completely liking that thing are completely liking loving.

One was loving some one and was completely liking that thing liking
loving that one. This one was completely loving that one and was
completely liking that thing completely liking loving that one. This one
the one loving and being loved then was one completely liking that thing
completely liking loving and being a loved one.

There are very many being living. Each one is one. Each one is one being
that one. Each one is like some. Each one is one. There are very many of
them. There are many kinds of them. Each one is one. Each one is that
one.

One is one and that one is one quite loving. This one is one needing
enough of that thing enough of loving so that that one is not needing
too much, needing to be doing everything. This one is one who was quite
enjoying loving. She was loving. She was marrying again then. She was
quite needing that thing, needing marrying so that she would not be
needing too much doing everything.

She was marrying and she was needing marrying. She was doing everything
and she was needing that thing she was needing doing everything. Any one
doing everything can be needing that thing needing doing everything. She
was needing that thing she was needing doing everything. In loving she
was marrying, she was doing everything. In marrying she was doing
everything. She was doing everything. She was marrying, she was needing
that thing she was needing marrying. She was moving in every direction
in doing everything. She was loving in marrying. She was marrying in
doing everything. She was doing everything in moving in every direction.

She was needing being such a one. She was moving in every direction. She
was loving. She was marrying. She was needing doing everything. She was
not beginning, she was not suffering, she was not loving, she was not
winning, she was going on and that was exciting, exciting enough for any
living continuing. She was not sacrificing, she was not seizing, she was
not losing, she was not winning, she was winning in every direction, she
was not gay then, she was not exciting then, she was moving then moving
in every direction, she had courage for that thing, courage for being
that one, she had courage in going on living, she had courage in moving
in every direction, she had courage in not winning, she had courage in
not losing, she had courage in not sacrificing, she had courage in not
seizing, she had courage in not being exciting, she had courage in
moving in every direction, she had courage in being one loving, she had
courage in being one marrying. She had courage. She had courage in being
one not being a gay one, she had courage in moving in every direction,
she had courage in being one moving in every direction, she had courage
in being one going on living, she had courage.

She was one being living, she could be exciting and then some one could
remember that she had not been one being exciting. She had courage then.
She could be kissing and any one could be remembering that she had not
been completely being fascinating. She had courage then. She could be
succeeding and any one could be pleased then and could be remembering
that thing, remembering that she always had had courage in going on
being living. She was lively and any one could remember that she could
be a lively one. Any one could remember she had courage. Any one could
remember that thing.

Some are living and they might if they went on living they might then
not be liking that thing. Some are living and they might if they went on
living they might then be liking that thing. One went on living and was
happier then happier than any one. That one went on living and went on
then being happier than any one. That one was then that one, one being
happier than any one ever had been in being one being living.

Some are living and they might if they went on living they might then
not be liking that thing. One of such of them was one going on living
and she went on quite liking that thing and she was one not completing
that thing not completing liking that thing liking living but she went
on living and she was liking that thing and certainly then there was no
reason why she should not be liking that thing, she went on living and
she was liking that thing.

She would be one going on being living even though she could understand
something of any one coming to be dying. She did go on being living
although she could tell any one how any one could come to be a dead one.
She did go on being living although she could explain how very many she
was knowing were not needing such a thing needing going on being living.

She went on being living, she did that thing with enough decision, she
did that thing with decision enough to be one being one doing
everything, doing everything enough, doing anything just enough.

She was one whom some one married and then they had a child born to them
and that child was one she was having with her and she was then finding
everything a little irregular. She said the things she should say then,
she did the things she should do then. Sometimes she was repeating other
things, sometimes she was changing her opinion, always she was changing
her opinion, she was decided enough then to say something, she did say
that thing, she told then the whole of that thing the whole of that
opinion.

She was satisfied with being living. Being living is not satisfying is
not completely satisfying, any one listening was hearing some
explanation of this thing. She was satisfied with being living. She was
satisfied with marrying. She was satisfied with being a married one. She
was satisfied with her husband who was quite a satisfying man. She was
satisfied with having had one child and having that child. She was
satisfied that she would not have another one. She was satisfied that he
went on being living, that she would not have to have another one. She
was satisfied with her mother and her brothers and her sister. They were
satisfactory as mother and sister and older brother and younger
brother. She had opinion enough about that thing about mentioning there
being existing. She was satisfied with regular living. She had opinion
enough of this thing to be quite expressing any such opinion. She was
satisfied with being living. She was satisfied with not any living being
satisfying. She was satisfied with her living. She was important in that
thing so as to be explaining satisfactory living: She did explain
satisfactory living. She was satisfied with being living. She was
satisfied that any living was not satisfying. She was satisfied with her
living. She expressed her opinion.

Each one is one. Each one is that one. Each one is one. Each one
expressing an opinion is expressing that thing that opinion.

One is expressing an opinion, one is expressing a suspicion. She is
expressing the whole of that thing. She is clearly having that thing,
that suspicion, that opinion. She is one clearly having that thing
having that suspicion, that opinion. She is that one the one having that
expression, that opinion and clearly expressing that thing that
suspicion, that opinion. She is completely loving, completely lovelily
loving. She is that one.

Each one is one. Each one is that one the one that one is. Each one is
one. Each one is one some are knowing. Each one is one. One is one many
are knowing. One is one not any one is completely certain is completely
charming. That one is one being one being almost completely feeling in
being almost completely charming. This one is one not completing any
such thing not completing feeling, not completing feeling in being
almost completely charming, not completing being almost completely
charming, not completing being charming.

She was marrying, she was not then married, she was one having lost
something and not remembering anything then of anything, of having or of
loving, she was marrying then again. She was married then. She was
living then, she was satisfying any one being satisfied with that thing.
She was satisfying herself then with being one satisfying herself with
that thing. She was not losing anything, she was losing that thing, she
was losing not losing anything.

Being that thing being one being something that was in a way a delicate
thing was something she was not having, she was not having that thing in
being one being that one being the one she might be, being the one she
was. Being a delicately sensitive one was something she was not having
in being completely that one being completely the one she might be
being, in being the one she had been being, in being the one she would
be being.

She was having delicate sensitive perception in being that one the one
having such things, in being one being the one she was being, she was
being one having delicate and sensitive perceptions. She was one always
having been and always being that one the one quite having delicate and
sensitive perceptions.

She was interested in being any one, she was not interested in every one
being that one, in every one being the one she was interested in. She
was not interested in any one being the one she was interested in. She
was not interested in that thing.

She was not interested in being one coming to perhaps not being that
one. She was not interested in that thing. She was not losing that thing
losing that she might perhaps be coming to not being that one.

She was one remembering something of any one being one believing that
some meaning is existing. She was one not losing much of remembering
something of some such thing. She might have been one being one not
remembering any thing of any one believing that some meaning is
existing. She might have been such a one, she was not such a one. She
was one remembering something of any one believing that some meaning is
existing.

She could lose anything, she did not lose remembering something of every
one believing that some meaning is existing. She might be losing
anything. She did lose anything. She did remember something of believing
that every one is believing anything of something being existing. She
did lose anything.

Any one being any one is being one. Any one being that one is being that
one. One being that one is one being that one and being then the one not
losing anything of that thing not losing anything. That one, the one
being that one and not losing anything is one completely clearly not
losing anything. That one is one being one having a sudden feeling of
having lost something and being then completely clearly searching and
being then completely clearly not losing the thing, not losing anything.
This one is one completely clearly not losing anything. This one is one
not losing anything. This one is one completely clearly not losing
anything.

Each one is one, there are many of them. Each one is one. Each one is
that one the one that one is. Each one is one, there are many of them.
Each one is one.

Each one is one. Each one might be one being like every other one if
every one was one being like every other one. Each one is one. Each one
is one not like every other one. Each one is one. Any one is like any
one. Every one is like every one. Each one is one. There are very many
of them. Each one is one.

Each one is one and is mentioning something of some such thing. Each one
has been one and is mentioning something of some such thing. Each one is
one and is mentioning something of being like any other one. Each one is
one and is mentioning having been like any other one. Each one is one.
Each one is one and is mentioning having been, is mentioning being that
one. Each one is one. Each one is that one, the one that one is. Each
one is one, each one is mentioning such a thing. Each one is mentioning
something, each one is mentioning having been mentioning something. Each
one is one. Each one is mentioning having been that one.

One was one and was mentioning something, mentioning having been that
one and in a way that one was that one. That one was one, that one had
been that one. That one had not been really mentioning quite that thing,
had not been quite mentioning having been that one.

That one being that one had been that one. That one being that one was
mentioning that thing was mentioning having been that one, was
mentioning being that one.

That one being that one was one needing something, was one needing
something to have been that one. That one being that one was needing
something, was one needing something to be that one. That one was not
that one. That one was mentioning that thing. That one was needing
something to be that one. That one was mentioning that thing, was
mentioning that that one was needing something to be that one.

That one had been one. The one that one had been was one who was not
needing anything for being that one. The one that one had been was one
not winning everything in being that one. The one that one had been was
one doing everything and completing these things and not needing being
that one. The one that one had been was one continuing being that one.
The one that one had been was one willing to be needing something. The
one that one had been was one almost willing to be giving anything to
win that thing. The one that one had been was one not winning that
thing. The one that one had been was one not needing winning that thing.
The one that one had been was one not being one who could be living in
having won that thing. The one that one had been was one not being able
to live in winning that thing. The one that one had been was one not
having been needing winning that thing. The one that one had been was
one expressing that thing expressing having been the one that one had
been. The one that one had been was one expressing having been willing
to be winning what that one had not been winning. The one that one had
been was one expressing being that one the one that one had been. The
one that one had been was one expressing being completing being willing,
being not willing to be winning what she had not been winning. The one
that one had been was one expressing disillusion. The one that one had
been was one expressing illusion. The one that one had been was one
expressing having been such a one the one that one had been, was
expressing having been completing willing the thing she had not been
winning. The one that one had been was expressing some such thing, was
quite mentioning every such thing. The one who had been that one the one
quite mentioning everything of any such thing was one who went on being
such a one one mentioning everything of any such thing.

Mentioning something was something this one was completely expressing.
Having been loving and not having been then winning anything was
something this one was mentioning. Having been marrying and not having
been needing all of that thing was something this one was mentioning.
Having been marrying and having been needing something of this thing was
something this one was mentioning. Being married and not completely
using that thing was something this one was mentioning. Being married
and doing that thing, doing being married was something this one was
mentioning. This one was one mentioning something. This one was one
completely expressing that thing expressing mentioning something. This
one was one having been mentioning everything. This one was one
completely expressing that thing expressing having been mentioning
everything.

In expressing mentioning anything, in expressing mentioning everything
she was that one the one she was mentioning having been. In being one
expressing mentioning any thing, in being one expressing mentioning
everything she was that one the one she was mentioning.

She was mentioning anything. She was mentioning everything, she was
expressing that thing expressing mentioning anything, expressing
mentioning everything.

In being that one the one expressing mentioning anything, the one
expressing mentioning everything, in being that one she was one being
one being that thing being the one expressing mentioning everything,
mentioning anything. In being that one, in expressing that thing in
expressing mentioning anything, mentioning everything she was one going
and always completing that thing completing and going on being one
expressing mentioning anything, mentioning everything. In going on
being that one, in completing that that thing she was going on being one
expressing mentioning everything, mentioning anything.

In mentioning anything, in mentioning everything she was one expressing
that mentioning anything, that mentioning everything is not anything as
everything is something that is a thing that is not anything as
everything is something that is just that thing. In mentioning anything,
in mentioning everything she is one being one expressing that mentioning
anything that mentioning everything is something that would be being
mentioning anything mentioning everything if everything and anything
were not being the thing she had been mentioning. In being one
mentioning anything, in being one mentioning everything, in mentioning
anything, in mentioning everything, she was mentioning everything, she
was mentioning anything, in mentioning anything, in mentioning
everything she was mentioning anything, she was mentioning everything.
In mentioning everything, in mentioning anything she was mentioning that
she was mentioning that in mentioning anything that in mentioning
everything she was mentioning that not anything, that not everything was
anything that she was not mentioning. In mentioning anything, in
mentioning everything she was mentioning that in mentioning anything, in
mentioning anything she was mentioning everything, she was mentioning
anything.

Each one is one. Each one has been, each one is mentioning something.
Each one is one. There are many of them. There are many mentioning
something. There are many mentioning everything. Each one is one. There
are many of them. Some are mentioning something, some are mentioning
everything, some are mentioning anything. Each one is one. Each one is
mentioning something.

Some one was mentioning something. She was not mentioning that thing,
she was not mentioning that she was needing something. She was
mentioning something. She was mentioning that she was not the one some
one was needing. She could mention that she was not the one any one was
admiring. She was one mentioning something. Any one can be one
mentioning something. In mentioning something that one was mentioning
that she had not been expressing anything of being one mentioning
something. She was that one one mentioning something. She was that one
not mentioning anything. She was that one one completely mentioning
everything and mentioning it again and again and always then completing
that thing completing mentioning everything. She was then that one one
completing again and again and again mentioning everything. She was
that one.

There are many who are telling anything in some way. Every one is one
telling something in some way. One was one telling anything in one way.
That one was one being that one. That one had been one loving in that
way, loving in a way and telling something in a way, and telling
anything in a way. The way she was telling anything was a way that was a
way she was realising anything could be something. She was realising
anything was something and the way she was telling about anything was
the way she was one being surprised by the thing that was anything. She
was surprised by anything being something. She was realising anything
was something. She was telling about anything telling about it in the
way anything surprised her by being something. She had been loving. She
had not been surprised by everything of that thing. She had been
surprised by something of that thing. She was telling everything in the
way she had been surprised by something. She was telling anything in a
way. She was telling everything in a way.

She was feeling something. She was feeling and she was remembering that
feeling was existing. She was feeling something and she would be
remembering that feeling had been existing. She was feeling something,
she was then not certain that feeling was existing. She was feeling
something. She would not be certain that feeling had been existing. She
was feeling something, she was saying that feeling was existing, that
she had not been certain that she had been feeling the feeling that was
existing. She was feeling something. She was not certain that feeling
was existing. She was saying that she was not certain she was feeling
the feeling she was not certain was existing.

She was learning anything. She was liking knowing the thing she had come
to be learning. She was surprised at the thing being existing the thing
she had just learned was existing. She was surprised then. She was not
surprised at everything. She was not surprised at anything. She was
surprised at everything. She was surprised at anything. She was in a way
saying she was being surprised at anything that she was knowing was
being existing. She was saying in a way saying something. She was saying
something and saying it in a way. She was saying being surprised at
anything being existing and she was saying it in a way. She was saying
that in a way she was not surprised at any thing being existing.

She was saying something in a way. In saying anything in a way she was
saying that she was surprised at everything being existing. In saying
everything she was in a way saying that she was surprised to be feeling
that anything is existing. In saying anything, she was saying that she
was knowing in a way that everything is existing.

She had been feeling something and she was remembering everything of
what she had been knowing she had been feeling and she had been knowing
she had not been certain she had been feeling what she had not been
certain she was feeling. She had been feeling something, she had been
feeling something, she had not been certain that she had been feeling
something. She remembered everything of what she had been feeling. She
remembered everything of feeling something. She remembered everything of
the feeling she had been feeling if she had been feeling something. She
remembered everything of that feeling of feeling something. She
remembered everything, she went on remembering everything of the feeling
she had been feeling if she had been feeling something. She had been
feeling something. She remembered everything of that thing.

In saying anything she was saying that anything surprised her that
surprised her and that anything surprised her because anything is
existing. In saying that anything is existing she was saying that not
anything surprised her because everything is existing and anything
surprised her. In saying anything she said it in the way she had been
feeling when anything surprised her and because anything surprised her
she said everything in that way, she said everything in the way she said
anything. She said everything in the way that she was feeling that she
was not certain that she was feeling anything and was feeling that
anything being something was something that was a thing that would be to
her a surprising thing. She said everything in that way. She was saying
something.

She was that one. There are many being living. Each one is one. There
are many of them. Each one is one, each one in being one and saying
something is saying something in a way, is saying anything in a way.

One was saying everything in a way. It was a very certain way. It was a
very decided way. It was a very clear way. It was a quite long way. It
was a completely clear way. It was a complete way. It was a delicate
way. It was an entire way. It was a continuing way. It was a way that
was a way that would come to be a thing that any one would know was a
way that was that way.

There are very many being living. Some are being loving. Some are loving
some one. Some are loving some. Some in loving some are loving very many
of them. Some in loving are being one loving and being the one loving
some and very many of them. Some in loving some and so loving very many
are being such a one one loving very many seeing and loving, and hearing
and loving, and loving and giving what any loving is meaning in having
come to be existing.

One who was such a one was one seeing and loving and being then that one
and was one hearing and loving and being then that one and was then that
one the one being that one.

Some one was one living and hearing and seeing and being then all one
loving, all one everything and everything then was being one completing
again and again what is necessary to loving being existing. She was
loving that is to say she was one being one in being the one giving what
is neccessary to loving being existing. She was hearing some one, she
was giving then to that one everything that is needing for loving to
have been existing. She was seeing some one, she was giving to that one
the thing that being loving has been having. She was one who was one
seeing some one. She was one who was one hearing some one. She was one
seeing one and she was one being that one the one seeing that one and
beginning then being the one who had seen that one. She came then to be
the one who had completed that thing completed seeing that one and that
one had been seen by her then and then it was all one her seeing that
one, that one seeing her and everything had been done then and sometimes
was then done again. She was one hearing one and she did then hear that
one and she was then one being one who was coming to hear that one and
she came then to have heard that one and that one came then to finishing
that thing finishing her having been hearing that one and they finished
that thing and it was then finished again. She was one being that one
and that was not troubling one who was one seeing and hearing and being
with that one and she was quite married to that one and they were both
then married and living and they were then living and going on being
living and they were then going on being married and being living.

Her voice, her pleasantness, her neurasthenia were expressing that she
was being one who was all one hearing and loving, seeing and loving,
hearing and seeing and loving. Her voice which was a pleasant thing was
the voice of one who was one seeing and loving and hearing and loving
and seeing and hearing and loving. Her pleasantness which was a present
thing was expressing that she was one seeing and loving, hearing and
loving, hearing and seeing and loving. Her neurasthenia which had been a
pleasant thing was something that was expressing that she was one seeing
and loving, hearing and loving, seeing and hearing and loving.

Her voice, her pleasantness, her neurasthenia were expressing that she
was one hearing and loving, seeing and loving, hearing and seeing and
loving. Her pleasantness which was a present thing was a pleasant thing.
Her being one seeing and loving which was a pleasant thing was a
pleasant thing. Her being one hearing and loving which was a pleasant
thing was a pleasant thing. Her voice which was a pleasant thing was a
pleasant thing.

She was one seeing and loving. She was one hearing and loving. She was
one hearing and seeing and loving. She was that one. She was one loving.

She was loving. She was being one who was completing being loving. That
was a pleasant thing. She was that one. She was loving. She was seeing
and loving. She was hearing and loving. She was that one.

She was one completing what loving was needing, which was a pleasant
thing. She was completing what loving was needing. She was that one.

In completing what loving was needing she was being that one. She was
that one. She was one completing what loving was needing. She was that
one. She was one which was a pleasant thing. She was that one. She was
completing what loving was needing. She was completing what loving was
needing which was that thing. She was seeing and loving. She was hearing
and loving. She was hearing and seeing and loving. She was completing
what loving was needing. She was completing loving, which was that
thing. She was loving. She was seeing and loving. She was hearing and
loving.

She was hearing, she had not then been hearing. She was seeing, she had
not then been seeing. She had not then been hearing, which was a
pleasant thing. She had not then been seeing, which was a pleasant
thing. She was not hearing which was a pleasant thing. She was not
seeing which was a pleasant thing. She was not hearing and seeing which
was a pleasant thing.

Being one loving, being one, she being one, she was one.

She was one, she was one and being one she was one seeing and loving,
hearing and loving, seeing and hearing and loving. She was one. She was
one seeing and loving, hearing and loving.

She was one. She was loving. She was one. Being one she was one.

There are many being living. Each one is one. There are many of them.
Each one is one. There are many of them.

One being one and being loving, one being one, being that one and being
loving was being one being loving. This one being loving was being that
one and that one was being in being loving. That one was loving and was
that one one being loving. This one in loving was loving and she was
loving. She was one and being loving and being loving she was one. She
was being loving. She was being one. She was being being loving. She was
one. She was being loving. She was loving. She was being one in being
loving. She was being the one she was being. She was being loving.

She was loving. In being loving she was one. She was one in being
loving. She was loving.

There are many living. There are many loving. There are many loving and
marrying. There are many loving and completing that thing and are not
marrying. There are many loving. Some are loving and are living in
loving. Some are loving and are living. Some are loving and they are
one. Some are being one and are loving some and are living and are being
one loving and are being one living.

One who was loving and living was that one. She was loving and she was
that one. She was loving and being one then living some. She was that
one. She was loving some.

She was one living some and loving some. She was that one. She was one
living some. She was one living some and she was loving some.

She was living. She was living and she was one being one living some.
She was living some. She was one living some and she was that one.

In being one living some she was one sitting some. In being one living
some she was one sitting some, she was one living some.

She was one living and she was one loving and in loving she was one
sitting. She was one sitting and in being one sitting she was one being
that one one living and loving, living and loving some, living and
loving and being that one one loving and living some, one loving enough
to be living enough, one loving enough to be sitting enough.

She was living enough, she was sitting enough. In being one living
enough and sitting enough she was one doing enough loving. She was doing
enough loving to be living enough and sitting enough.

She was one and that one the one she was was one who was living enough
certainly living enough to be loving some. She was loving enough to be
loving enough. She was loving enough to be sitting some. She was loving
enough to be sitting enough.

She was one saying something saying that she was loving enough and
living enough. She was one saying that she was loving enough and sitting
enough. She was one saying that she was living enough and sitting. She
was one saying that she was sitting enough.

She was one and being that one she was saying that she was that one
enough. She was that one. She was that one enough.

She was one. She was enough needing being that thing, she was quite
needing that thing, she was needing enough being that one.

She was one. She was one who was that one and was quite needing being
that one. She was one. She was one who was one living enough. She was
one. She was one who was sitting enough. She was one who was loving
enough.

She was one and being one she was one being that one and she was being
that one and being that one she was one going on being that one quite
enough going on being that one. She was going on enough being that one.
She was going on being one, she was one going on being the one she was.

In being that one she was one quite being one, she was one being enough
one. In being that one she was being one who was one who was going on
enough in being that one. In being that one she was going on being one
loving enough, living enough, sitting enough.

She was large enough to be that one one sitting enough. She was large
enough. She was giving enough of being one loving enough, living enough,
sitting enough to be one living enough. She was giving enough of being
one sitting enough, loving enough to be one going on living enough. She
was large enough to be one living enough, sitting enough, loving enough.
She was large enough. She was loving enough. She was sitting enough. She
was living enough.

She was going on living and she was living enough. She was going on
living. She was loving enough. She was going on living enough. She was
going on living. She was sitting enough. She was going on living enough.

She was being one who did complete that thing quite complete that thing,
quite complete sitting. She was one and she was being one not troubling
that thing not troubling being the one being sitting. She was one and
she was sitting and she was one and she was living enough. She was one
giving that thing giving that thing enough giving being one not
troubling being that one being the one sitting. She was one giving
enough, she was one giving being one being one living enough, loving
enough, sitting enough, she was one giving enough, she was one giving
being one not troubling her being one being sitting. She was giving
enough. She was loving enough. She was sitting enough. She was living
enough.

She was one, she was one and she was different enough from any other
one. She was different enough.

She was one. There are some. There are many being living. There are many
being living. There are enough going on being living.

One going on being living, and she was going on being living, one going
on being living was one telling quite telling, clearly telling that some
who are ones being living are ones smelling and being living and
smelling they are needing being ones using anything and being ones not
having everything are ones taking what they are needing and being ones
taking everything are ones smelling. Some one clearly telling everything
is telling that such ones are ones being living, and is clearly telling
that one listening is one being one coming to be one not having anything
of that one being taken by any such a one.

Some are taking something, some are taking everything, some are not
taking everything but would be taking anything. Some are taking what
they expect to be taking.

There are many being living. There is one being living. This one has
been being living. This one is one almost succeeding in not taking
everything. This one is one taking anything. This one is one having been
expecting to be taking everything. This one has been taking what she was
taking. This one has been taking. She was expecting to be one any one
would be expecting to have taken what she was expecting to take. She was
one quite succeeding in taking what she was expecting to take. She might
have been one succeeding in living. She might be one not succeeding in
living. She was one not having everything. She was one not going on
expecting anything. She was one being a quite sad enough one. She was
one.

In being a sad enough one she was one who might have been one succeeding
in living. She was a sad enough one.

In being one who might have been one succeeding in living she was one
who had not been failing in living.

In being one who had not been failing in living she was one expecting
and getting what she expected to be getting by asking.

She had been one loving. She was one loving children. She had been one
loving. She married the one she was loving. Before she married the one
she was loving she had had a child who had not been born living. In
having had a child who had not been born living she had been one not
needing that thing not needing having a child who had not been born
living. In being one loving children she had not been one sorrowing. In
being one loving the one she was loving she came to be one he was
marrying.

She was married and she was expecting to be getting what she expected to
get by asking and she was expecting to be one expecting getting what she
was getting. She was one going on being one expecting to be getting what
she was not completely asking and she came then to get something of that
thing, she came to get more of the thing which she expected to be
getting. She was succeeding in living. She expected to be getting what
she expected to be getting. She went on being one getting what she had
expected she would be getting. She was being a sad one. She was being a
sad enough one.

She was one loving. She was one and she was one not expecting
everything, she was one loving and not marrying. She was one loving and
not marrying and then she was married by him. She married him and she
was not expecting everything. She married him and they were living then
in that thing and she expected to be having everything for which she
expected to be asking.

She was one succeeding in living that is she expected to be having what
she expected to be asking for. She did not expect everything. She
expected to be one having what she was expecting.

She had this thing. She had loving children. She had one. He did not
live to be going on being living. She was not expecting that thing, she
was not expecting him to be one not going on being living. She was one
not succeeding in living. She was a sad enough one. She was expecting to
be expecting what she asked for. She was expecting what she was asking
for. She went on expecting being one having that thing.

She was one liking children. She was a sad enough one. She was expecting
being that one the one she was being. She was being one being that one.
She was one expecting having what she was expecting.

Being that one she was creating remembering the thing remembering being
that one. Remembering being that one she was one not remembering being
one having been that one.

She was one loving children. She was one being one remembering having
been one creating being a sad one. Being one loving children she was one
refusing going on not creating being a sad one. Being one refusing
something she was one loving children. Being one refusing anything she
was one being a sad one. Being a sad one she was one going on creating
having been that one. She was one refusing being one not coming because
she was creating being a sad one. Being one being a sad one she was one
creating coming because she was one going on loving children. Being one
loving children she was one creating waiting to be going. Being one
creating waiting to be going she was one being one having been the one
she had been. Being that one the one she was she was creating being that
one. Being the one she was she was a sad one. Being loving children she
was one remembering she had been one being that one. Being that one she
was waiting being one refusing to be waiting. Being one refusing to be
waiting she was one having been one loving children.

Being one waiting to be refusing to be waiting is something. Being one
creating that thing is something. There are many of them.

Being one expecting what they are expecting is something. Being one
creating that thing is something. There are many of them.

Knowing everything is something. Knowing that in knowing everything one
is leaving out something is something that some one expecting everything
is expecting. Expecting to be not expecting anything is something.

One who was not expecting anything, that is to say one who was creating
not expecting anything was one not expecting anything. This one not
expecting anything was creating this thing. This one in creating that
thing was one being one and that one being that one was creating not
expecting anything. In creating that thing that one was creating
something. That one then came to be one having something. That one then
came to be needing everything. That one came then to be having
everything. That one then had everything. That was something. That one
went on completing that thing completing needing having everything,
completing having everything.

That one is one. Another one is another one. Another one is one and she
is one accepting what she is accepting to be having. She is one
accepting and completing that thing creating acceptation.

She was one and doing something, doing everything in helping, going on
helping, coming to be doing anything, she was that one she was married
then and being one being that one she was doing what was needed and
anything was needed, something was needed, she was doing that thing. She
was married and was helping, she was coming in and remembering,
remembering everything and reminding the one she had married what he
needed to remember to be one completely telling how he had come to do
what he had come to be doing. She was one doing everything, she was one
doing anything, she was one doing something to be helping to be going on
being that one the one helping. She was that one.

She came to remember everything. She had been remembering to be
helping. She did remember everything. She was helping.

She was doing what she was doing, she was helping. She was remembering
what she was remembering, she was helping. She was doing something to be
that one, to be helping.

She was helping. She was moving anything that needed moving, she was
leaving anything that needed leaving, she was preparing anything that
needed preparing, she was waiting for anything that needed waiting, she
was telling anything that needed telling, she was receiving anything
that needed receiving, she was filling anything that needed filling, she
was expecting anything that needed expecting. She was helping, she was
that one, she did something to be that one, she went on being that one.

She was helping, she was giving helping to the one who was one being one
and she was that one the one giving helping. She was that one. She was
that one and she was one who came to be one having been that one. She
was that one and she came to be that one and she was then one having
been that one. She was that one.

In coming she was waiting, she had been loving and she was marrying and
she was coming and she would be waiting and she would be proceeding to
be completing having been one having continued helping. In coming she
was remembering and starting and begging pardon and meaning to be
continuing and completing having been believing. She had been one
helping one who was one who was that one and in being that one was one
who was that one. She one helping and was being one who was helping one
who was one.

She helped and she was one who had been that one. She helped and she was
one who was continuing being one who had been that one. She had helped
and she was one who had been that one. She had helped and she was one
continuing being the one who had been that one.

She was one, she had been helping in waiting, she had been completing
waiting, she had been helping. She had been helping, she had been
working, she had been moving, she had been waiting to be questioning,
she had been completing having been waiting to be questioning.

She was one, being that one was everything that being that one she was
one accomplishing. She was one completing in accomplishing being one
being that one. She was one and being that one and accomplishing helping
and waiting to be questioning she was one who could be one arranging in
being that one to be one completing helping.

She was one moving and in moving she was not showing that in that thing
she was that one coming to be that one. In moving she was moving and in
moving she was moving. She was moving and in that thing she was that one
and that one was one being one moving. She was that one.

She was one and in being one coming to be completing being that one she
was one who was arranging that she would remember that in being that one
she had arranged being that one. She was one having asked a question.
She was one joining in being travelling. She had been travelling. She
was then travelling again. She was then joining in travelling being
existing. She had been one being one realising that she had been one
completing helping. She had been one expressing that being that one she
was one and being one she was one expressing that she was one. She had
come to be one expressing being one, expressing having been one, she had
been one completing helping.

She was married, she had children. She had children and she had a child
and in being that one she was one completing arranging that she was one
completing helping. She was one and she came to be one being one. She
was one and she was being one. She was one and she came to be one being
one and that one was one and being that one she was one who had been
that one.

And being that one and having been that one she was one who in helping
who in waiting to be questioning who in having been that one is one and
she is one who in moving is one and she is one who in completing helping
is one and she is one who in going on being one arranging having been
that one is one, and she is one who in going on arranging something is
one and she is one coming again to arrange something and in being that
one in being one coming again to be arranging something she is one. She
is one, she is that one, she has been one, she has been that one.

There are very many who being one are being the one helping some one.
There are very many helping in being the one helping any one. There are
very many helping in being the one helping some.

There are very many and helping is being existing. A little helping is
being existing.

A little helping being existing some one helping, quite a little helping
any one is one quite helping having some one quite helping her then.
Some one having been quite a little helping some is one coming to be one
having some one helping her in not helping, not helping any one.

Quite a little helping being existing some one having been being one
helping quite a little helping is one being one helping one. Some one
being one having been that one one having been quite a little helping
every one is one being one quite a little helping some one. Some one
being one having begun being one helping, quite a little helping any one
is one being one helping some one and being one being helped then quite
helped then, being one quite helped in being one not helping any one. A
little helping has been existing. Helping is being existing.

If one is one and one being one that one is one, if one is one then one
being one, and being one is being one suffering in being one, then that
one being one and being suffering is being one, and being one and being
suffering that one is one expressing anything. Being one being
suffering, that is being one not suffering, being one having been coming
to be suffering and having been one not having come to be doing that
thing, being one being suffering that is being one being breathing in
having been coming, being one sighing that is being one heavily
breathing, being one suffering that is being one breathing in hurrying,
being one suffering is something. Being one being one not having been
one being the one any one would have been in being that one, being that
one is something. Being one being one being the one being one coming
from having been the one being with one who was suffering is something.

Being one telling something about each one and being one beginning from
the beginning in telling that thing is being some one. Being one coming
from having been hearing some one who was one having been telling that
some one was some other one is something. Being one telling some from
the beginning about some telling about any one being any other one is
being some one.

She was one, she was enough one to be that one. She was that one. She
was enough of that one in being that one.

She was one and was then one mentioning that she was that one and in
mentioning that thing she was one expecting that she would be needing to
be going on being that one. She was that one and again in mentioning
anything she was mentioning that in being that one she had been one
succeeding in expecting to be going on being that one. In being that one
she was gathering in being expecting to be going on being that one. In
being that one she was going on gathering in going on being that one.

If she was one and she was that one, if she was one she was not hearing
everything. If she was one and she was that one if she was one she was
hearing something. If she was one and she was that one, if she was one
she was accepting anything. If she was one and she was that one she was
angrily refusing something she had been hearing. If she was one and she
was that one she was asking any one if she was one. If she was one and
she was that one she was asking every one for something. If she was one
she was remembering that every one had tried to give her that thing, or
if she was one she was telling everything in telling that every one had
been one the one trying to give her what every one knew she was
certainly one not giving. If she was one she was that one.

She was one asking and giving and recommending and receiving and asking
to be that one and helping to be getting and expressing any one knowing
that she was that one and asking any one to be telling something of that
thing and listening to any one having been not denying she was that one
and remembering that any one was one having come to be denying she was
that one and being one telling about such a thing and being one being
one who might not have been that one if she had not been that one and
being one remembering that any one was remembering that she was that one
in being that one.

She was being one hearing, when she was hearing, hearing that she was
that one. She was one hearing, when she was hearing, and was then
hearing that some one was hearing that she was that one. She was one
hearing, when she was hearing, she was one hearing that she was that
one.

She was one hearing, when she was hearing, hearing that she might not be
that one. She was one hearing, when she was hearing, she was one hearing
that some one could be hearing that she was not that one. She was one
telling what she was hearing, she was then quite telling every one.

She was one hearing, when she was hearing, she was hearing that being
that one she was being that one. She was hearing, when she was hearing,
she was hearing that then.

In being hearing she was hearing something. In being hearing something
she was repeating. In being hearing something she was gasping. In being
hearing something she was sighing. In being hearing something she was
talking. In being hearing something she was remembering that she was one
not offending. In being hearing something she was contenting in
producing hearing that thing. In being hearing something she was
confirming that she was hearing that thing. In being hearing something
she was demonstrating that hearing that thing was an outrageous thing.
In being hearing something she was breathing that any one could hear
that thing. In being hearing something she was recounting that not any
one would have heard that thing. In being hearing something she was
pleasing in not having been hearing all of that thing. In being hearing
something she was breathing in almost sleeping. In being hearing
something she was feeling that being dressed is exhausting. In being
hearing something she was being one who had been trembling. In being
hearing something she was one who had been sighing. In being hearing
something she was being one who had been gasping. In being hearing
something she was one who would be completing telling. In being hearing
something she was one expecting to not be hearing everything. In being
hearing something she was one having been one not hearing any such
thing.

In having been that one and being that one she was one and any one
deciding that thing was certain, she was one who could have something
from recommending anything. In having been that one and being that one
she was one and any one was deciding that thing she was one having been
helping becoming a lighter one. In having been that one and being that
one some who were deciding were certain that she was one who was
attracting. In having been that one and being that one very many were
deciding very often that she had been helping any one to be one not
helping her to be a completer one of a kind of a one. In having been
that one and being that one every one was hearing, seeing and having her
be one asking any one anything. In having been that one and being that
one any one was having her having been doing anything to ask them to be
one asking her to do anything. In having been one, in being one she was
being one and some were deciding that not any one was suffering. She
being one and having been one some were coming to deciding that they
were certain that some one had come to be suffering. She being one and
having been one some were deciding that she might have come to be
destroying being that one. She being one and having been one some were
coming to be knowing that she was coming again to be telling another
thing. She being one and having been that one some might have been
certain that in telling everything she was telling something.

How could she be one and be that one. How could she be one and not be
that one. How could she be one and be that one, how could she be that
one. How could she be one and be that one. How could she be one and not
be that one.

Every one knowing she was continuing was laughing. Any one knowing she
was continuing was laughing. Any one knowing she was continuing was
certain was certain that she was continuing. Any one knowing she was
continuing and being certain she was continuing was certain she was
continuing being that one.

Being continuing is being continuing. She was continuing. Any one
knowing she had been continuing was certain that she had done that
thing was certain that she had been continuing. Being continuing she was
being that one.

Any one continuing is continuing. Every one continuing every one is
continuing. Any one continuing is continuing. Continuing is continuing.

Continuing and assisting assisting continuing is assisting continuing.
Continuing is continuing. Assisting continuing is assisting continuing.

Some one who is continuing is assisting continuing. This one assisting
continuing is assisting herself then is assisting herself to continue
and in continuing is completely expressing what some one, what some are
in being ones being existing. Some one continuing is quite continuing
and in quite continuing is quite completely expressing what some are who
are being existing.

This one continuing quite continuing and quite expressing quite
continuing expressing what some are who are being living, this one is
continuing quite continuing, this one is quite wonderfully continuing,
quite completely, quite clearly, quite entirely, quite continuously
continuing, quite expressing quite completely expressing what some are
who are being living.

This one being one continuing and continuing being continuing this one
being continuing is continuing expressing what some are who are being
ones being living. This one is one continuing. Continuing is continuing.

Any one being one, every one being one, many being living, some being
feeling, some being in having been going to be feeling, some being in
wanting to be feeling, some being in expecting feeling, some being in
feeling, some being in completing feeling by coming to be feeling, some
being in continuing feeling in expecting to be feeling, some being in
continuing going to be feeling, some being in feeling being coming, some
being in feeling being existing, any one being one, every one being one,
very many being living, there are some being living, there is one being
living, there are very many being living.

One being living, one being feeling, this one is one having been
expecting to be feeling, this one is one extending being feeling by not
being feeling, this one is one completing being feeling by wanting being
feeling, this one is one being feeling and this one is one including
feeling by being one completely working.

In feeling in being feeling, in her feeling in her being feeling there
is being existing that feeling is being existing, that is there is being
existing that she is feeling and she feeling she is feeling something,
and she feeling something she is working, and she working she is working
to be one keeping being living and she being working to be one keeping
being living and feeling something she is feeling that she is completing
being feeling by being working to be one keeping being living.

She being one and being working and she feeling and feeling something
and she expecting to be one always being one completing feeling she is
one living in feeling being existing, she is one working in feeling
being existing.

She is one working. She is one working and to be one working she is one
feeling something, she is one feeling she is one living in feeling being
existing and she being then one completely working.

She is one feeling and she is one working in feeling being existing, she
is one working and she is one expecting to be one completely working and
being one completely working she is one working in feeling being
existing. She is one feeling something and she is one completing that
thing in being one completely working.

She is not feeling that she is completing feeling being existing by
being completely working, she is feeling that she has been having
feeling something, she is feeling that she is having feeling something,
she is feeling that she is completely working.

She is completely working, she is feeling something, she has been
expecting to be feeling something, she is expecting to be feeling that
thing, she is not feeling that she is completely working she is not
completely feeling that thing.

She being one she is one remembering that other ones any other ones are
ones having been, being ones and they are ones not understanding
anything, not being ones being ones who are working in being ones, not
working to be completing being ones. She being one she is feeling, she
is feeling that every one, that any one is being one and is feeling that
every one are ones being ones not feeling in working in completing
anything. She being one she is one remembering that every one is feeling
something. She being one she is feeling then something.

In being one she was married and being married she had a child and she
could have had more then more children and being married then she could
not have then more children.

In being one she was married. In being married she was completing that
thing completing being working. In being working she was having that
thing having being married to some one. In being married to some one she
was continuing being one having expected to be one being one. In being
married she was continuing having what she was expecting to want to be
having.

In being a married one she was one expecting not to be needing being
any other one. In being a married one she was one continuing to be
expecting to continue being that one. In being a married one she was
having what she was continuing to be expecting to be having. In being a
married one she was a married one. In being a married one she was
continuing being a married one. In being a married one she was
continuing being one expecting to be continuing being that one. In being
a married one she was a married one.

In being a married one she had a child. In having a child she was one
continuing being one having that one. In having a child she was
completing that thing by being one having that one having that child. In
having that child she was remembering that children being existing she
was having that child and in having that child she was one deciding not
to be questioning about that child having been one and coming to be that
one. In having that child and questioning about children being existing
she was repeating that she could be deciding that the child she had was
that one. She had a child. She had that one. She was repeating that
thing. She was repeating that she had that child, that she had that one.
She was repeating that that child was that one.

She was expressing that that child was that one. She was again and again
expressing that thing. She was expressing that her child was that one.
She was expressing that thing. She was that one the one expressing that
thing.

She was one expressing that thing. She was one having that thing having
expressing that her child was that one, was one, was the one that child
was. She was remembering children were existing. She was completely
remembering that her child was one, was that one, she was completely
remembering that thing.

In remembering that children are existing she was mentioning that
children being existing and her child being that one, her child was one
and being one she was mentioning that thing. She mentioning that thing,
mentioning that her child was that one, she mentioning that thing was
mentioning that children are existing.

In being one she was completing, completing that she was doing what she
was completely willing to be doing to be one completing going on being
married and having the child that was the child she had. She was one
completing going on being willing to be completing going on being that
one and going on being married and going on having their child. She was
one completing going on being living, she and the two of them.

She and the one of them, she and the two of them she was completing
going on being living.

Any one living, every one living, very many living, one living. One
living everything is existing. One existing, that is everything. There
is one living. One living, that is everything. One is everything. One
living is everything. One living is anything. One living, everything is
existing. One living, that is everything.

That one, one is living, that is everything. That one is living.

That one is existing, that is everything, that one the one that is
living is living and that one living that is everything. That one is
everything. That one, that one existing, that, that is everything. That
one existing, that is everything. One existing, that is everything. One
living, that is everything.

Some are living. Several are living. She living, she being living is
being one needing what she is taking. She is taking what she is needing.
She is remembering not refusing what she was not taking. She is not
remembering taking what she is not needing.

She was not taking everything. She was taking what she had taken. She
was remembering taking what she had taken. She was remembering going on
taking what she had taken. She did not refuse what she did not take. She
was taking what she was taking. She remembered something which she had
been taking. She remembered what she had taken. She remembered what she
was taking.

She began being one and in beginning she was one and being one she was
one needing to be taking what she had been taking. She began being one
and in beginning being one she was one. In being one she was that one
and in being that one she was using what she was taking. In using what
she was taking she was not taking what she was not using. In using what
she was taking she was needing to be using what she was using. In
needing to be using what she was taking she was taking everything she
was taking. In using what she was taking she was using anything she was
taking. In taking anything she was not refusing what she was not taking.
In refusing anything she was being one taking what she was taking. In
taking anything she was using what she was taking. In using anything she
had used that thing. In taking anything she had used that thing.

Why in taking something had she not taken everything, why in taking
everything had she been asking for something, why in using anything had
she refused that thing, why in telling everything has she stopped
telling everything, why in remembering everything did she forget
anything, why in forgetting everything did she continue telling
something, why in telling something did she ask to remember everything,
why in asking to remember everything did she give forgetting anything,
why being that one is she being that one, being one being a careful one,
being one using not being that one, being one asking to be using being
that one, being one liking having been using that one, why not using
being that one is she being that one, why using being that one is she
one not having that thing not having using being that one, why being
that one is she not being that one when she being that one is needing to
be using what she is taking, is taking what she is using, is taking what
she is needing, is needing what she is taking, why being that one is she
one and she is one and she is that one, why then is she one carefully
being that one if she is one not using being that one, why is she one
not needing being that one when she being that one is one needing what
she is using, why being that one is she one and she is one one being one
who is taking what she is using, who is taking what she is needing, who
is not refusing what she is not using, who is needing what she is
taking, who is taking what she is needing, why is she that one, she is
that one because such a one is one not being one who is being one but is
being one in being one taking what she is needing.

This one is one who was one and being that one was one having taken one
in being taken by that one and having taken that one in being taken by
that one was leaving that one in being left by that one. In leaving that
one in being left by that one she was one needing what she was taking.
In being one coming to be taking what she was needing she was one being
one using what she was needing. She was one then using what she was
taking. She was then a married one and in being a married one she was
one having been needing what she was taking and using what she was
taking she was completing being one carefully taking and carefully using
what she was needing.

She was one, she was a married one, she had children, she was a pleasant
one and any one not being a pleasant one is not a pleasant one and this
one was not a pleasant one and any one being a pleasant one is a
pleasant one. This one was one. There are many of them. This one was
one, there are quite a number of them. This one was one. This one and
there are a number of them of this kind of them this one was one quite
one of that kind of them. There are many of them. There are many of any
kind of a one. There are many women, many being living.

There is one being living. There is one and that one being a pleasant
one is one giving that thing giving being that one and in being that one
and she is that one in being that one and giving she is that one and
being that one that very one in being that one and she is that one she
is that very one in being that one and in giving, in being that one and
giving and she is that one and she is giving that thing, in being that
one and giving that one she is giving that one giving all of that one
and in giving all of that one she is giving all of that one and she is
giving all of that one, she, that one, she is giving all of that one.

This one is one. She is that one. She is giving all of that one. She,
that one, she is giving, giving all of that one.

She, that one, is giving is giving all of that one. She is giving all of
that one. She is doing that thing. She is getting getting everything.
She is getting everything that she is needing. She has to have what she
has to have. She is getting what she has to have. She has what she has
to have. She has that.

She has what she has. She has what she has to have. She has everything
that she has to have. She has to have what she has to have. She has what
she has to have.

She is one. She is that one. She is giving all of that one. She has to
have what she has to have. She has what she has to have. She has
everything.

This one is one. She is that one.

Some other ones who are ones are ones and being ones are ones wanting to
have what they have to have and being such ones are ones and they are
ones who if they had been ones having what they had to have would have
been ones having what they had to have. They would have been ones having
what they had to have if they had been ones coming to be ones having
what they have to have. They are ones needing being ones giving what
they are needing to be giving and being ones needing to be giving what
they are needing to be giving they are ones not coming to be ones having
been having giving what they are needing to be giving.

One is one and being that one is one being one having been one and being
one needing to have what she is needing to have. She has this thing, she
has needing to have what she is needing to have. She has been having
this thing she has been needing to have what she has been needing to
have. She is being one and she is one having been receiving that thing
having been receiving needing to have what she has to have. She is one
who would have been such a one needing to have what she has to have if
she were such a one if she were one needing to have what she has to
have. She is one. She has to have what she has to have and she would be
such a one if she were such a one.

She was one who in beginning was nicely that one. She was one who in
completing that beginning was beautifully that one. She was one
continuing and being that one and was then a pleasant one in going on
succeeding in being that one. She was then that one and was then going
on being that one. She was then one, she was then quite that one.

She was that one and being that one and having that thing having needing
being receiving having what she was needing having she was one being one
being that one and being that one she was one refusing something and
refusing that thing she was refusing what she was not needing to be
having. Refusing that thing she was laughing, refusing that thing she
was persisting, re-refusing that thing she was refusing what she was not
needing to be having.

She was one and she was needing what she was needing to be having. She
was one and she was one going on being one that one the one needing to
be having what she was needing to be having. She was that one.

She had a feeling and she was saying something she was saying that being
one she was being that one. She had a feeling and being then walking she
walked very much and walking very much she was feeling that being one
she was that one.

She was one and telling something she was certain that she had been
telling that she being one she was that one. She being one and deciding
that in walking she would not be running she running was liking that she
was running and liking that, she was knowing that she would be agreeing
that she being one she was that one.

She knowing that she could be agreeing that being one she was that one
she was feeling in being one receiving encouraging in being one. She
being one receiving encouraging in being one was certain that she could
be telling that in being one she was that one.

In being certain that she could be telling that in being one she was
that one she was feeling in being one who was certain to be gently
denying something.

She was that one and certainly if she could be one having what she was
needing to be having she could have been one asking for everything. She
was that one and if she was one certain to be gently denying something
she was one feeling in being one who was coming not to have been having
what she had been needing to be having. In being one feeling in being
one who was one not having what she was needing to be having she was
being one deciding in telling anything. In being one deciding in telling
anything she was defining that in being one she was being that one.

She was that one and she was one who deciding that being that one she
was hearing something was one deciding that if she was one having what
she was needing to be having could be one hearing something that she
being that one had been deciding that she was not hearing.

She being that one she was one deciding that being that one she might go
on being that one. She being that one, she was one deciding and being
one deciding she was deciding that she might be that one. She was
deciding that she might be that one and she was then being one deciding
that she would be deciding about going on being one who was one hearing
what she would be hearing. In deciding about hearing what she would be
hearing she was deciding that she could be one who would be deciding to
be expecting to be having what she was needing to be having. In being
one who was deciding to be expecting to be having what she was needing
to be having she was deciding that being that one she was one expecting
anything. In deciding that she being that one she was one expecting
anything she was deciding that she was going on being that one. In going
on being that one she was quite deciding that she was needing what she
was needing to be having. In deciding to be that one she was being one
expecting anything. In expecting anything she was expecting to be going
on being that one. In going on being that one she was deciding to be
deciding what she was going to be hearing. In being that one she went on
being one.

She was one. There was another one. Another one was one and being one
was one who in studying was learning learning what she had been
studying. In studying she was one going on working and in going on
working she had been learning and in having been learning she was that
one the one she was.

In being that one the one she was she was deciding that she was not
needing being one having any other thing. In deciding that thing she was
agreeing that she was one and she was agreeing that she was quite that
one and she was agreeing that some needed something that they needed to
be having.

She was one and in being that one and she was that one she needed enough
of being that one to be needing being studying and being studying she
was one having been learning what she had been studying.

She was that one, she was needing that thing needing being that one, she
was studying, she was needing that thing needing studying, she had been
learning what she had been studying, she was needing that thing she was
needing having been learning what she had been studying. She was this
one. She was an older one. She was knowing what she had been studying
and learning. She was quite that one. She was that one and she was
enough that one to be one being one and she was enough one to go on
being one and she was enough one to be an older one.

There are then some. There are many of them. Any of them being living
are going on being living and when they are dead ones and all of them
sometime are not living, there are then some of them, there are then
many of them.

There is one. She is one being one and being one she is one creating
that thing creating that there is one. In creating that thing creating
that she is one she is not creating anything. In not creating anything
she is being that one she is being the one not creating anything and in
being that one she is one and in being one she is creating that thing
creating being one. She is one. She is that one. What a tender thing it
is to be one. What a one she is the one that is one. She is one and
being one she is a tender one and being a tender one she is one. She is
one. She is a tender one. She is that one. She is the one that is one.
She is a tender one. She is that one the one that is a tender one. She
is one. She being one she is one. She is one and being that one she is
being creating being one. She creating being one she is a tender one.
She being a tender one she is quite one, she is one. She is one. She is
that one. She is that one who is one who is a tender one.

There are many very many. Any of the very many being that one is one who
if she is a tender one is in a way a tender one. If she is in a way a
tender one she is in some way a tender one.

If she is in a way a tender one and there are very many and any of them
who are tender ones are in a way tender ones, if she is in a way a
tender one and some one is in a way a tender one, if she is in a way a
tender one she is one who being a tender one is telling something is
telling something of having been loving. If she is in a way a tender one
and she is in a way a tender one, if she is in a way a tender one she is
telling about being loving. If she is a tender one and in a way she is a
tender one, if she is in a way a tender one then when she is in a way a
tender one she is telling that she could have been needing having
loving.

She was needing having loving. She was being a tender one in telling
that she had been needing having loving. She was a tender one in telling
that she would have been needing having loving.

In being a tender one she was one being one who being loving was telling
that she would have been needing having loving. In being a tender one
she was one giving being that one.

In being a tender one she was one telling about having been loving and
not having been a tender one. In being a tender one she was telling that
she had been loving, that she had been having loving, that she had not
been a tender one.

If she were telling everything she was telling she would have been an
honest one. She was not telling everything she was telling.

She was not an honest one that is some were certain that she was an
honest one. She was an honest one that is some were certain that she was
an honest one.

In being an honest one she was a good one. In being an honest one she
was telling what she was telling. In being an honest one, in telling
what she was telling, she was needing being one being an honest one in
being a good one in being one being telling what she was telling.

In being one succeeding she was one helping any one to be certain that
in being succeeding she was not having that thing she was not having
being succeeding. In being succeeding she was helping any one to be
certain that in being succeeding she was being one being succeeding.

In coming again she was being one who might be one not coming again. She
might be one not coming again and if she was one not coming again she
was then one being one who might be coming again. If she might be coming
again she was one who in coming again was one who might not have come
again.

In coming again she was one who in coming again was one who might not
have been coming again. She was one and in not coming again she was
receiving that if she would be one coming again she would be one who was
one who might not have been coming again.

She was not coming again. In not coming again she was being one who was
one who would not be coming again. In being that one she was receiving
that she was being one who would not be coming again. In being that one
she was one who being one receiving something was receiving that she was
one who might be one coming again.

In coming again she came and in coming she was one continuing to be
receiving that she was one who might have been one who would not be
coming again, she was one continuing to be receiving that she was one
who might have been one who would be coming again.

She had not come, she did come, in coming she came and in having come
she had been one who had been one who would come. In having been one who
had been one who would come she was one who could have been one who
would not come. She came.

In coming she was one coming and in being one coming she was one who had
come and in being one who had come she was one who was one not coming if
she had been one who had not come. If she had been one who had not come
she would have been that one the one who had come.

She would not go on remembering that she had not been using anything.
She would go on remembering that she had been using something. In
remembering that she had been using something she was being that one the
one who had been coming. In remembering that she had been using
something she was being that one the one who might not have been coming.

In being one she was one who if it took courage to be one being living
could be one being living. In being one being living she was living in
being one having courage and in being one having courage being one being
living. If it took courage to do something and she did that thing she
was one being one who had done that thing. If it took courage to do
something she having done that thing she was being one who had courage.
If something was done and she had not done that thing she was being one
who had not done that thing. If something was done and it needed courage
to do that thing and she had not done that thing she was then one who
had not done that thing.

In doing everything in being one doing something she was being one who
was doing what she did for every one. In doing what she did for every
one she was one doing anything for any one. In doing anything for any
one she was doing everything.

She did everything, she did anything, she did something for any one and
in doing something for any one she was being one who was not needing
that anything was being done. In not needing that anything was being
done she was being one and being one she was one whom anybody accepting
was realising as being one who was one who not needing that anything was
being done was one doing anything.

In being one doing anything she was one remembering that she was not
needing that anything was done. In being one remembering that she was
not needing that anything is done she was one reminding any one of
something they should be doing. In reminding any one of something they
should be doing she was being one doing anything. In doing anything she
was being one being that one and being that one and not needing that
anything be done she was one coming. And in coming and in going and in
staying and in waiting and in running and in asking and in buying and in
loving she was one doing that thing doing anything and being that one
one not needing that anything be done. She was being that one and in
being that one she was one who if she could be one telling everything
was telling that if she were doing a thing and it took courage to do
that thing she had done that thing. She was one and if she could be one
telling anything she was one who would be one telling that if she did
not do something and it would take courage to do that thing she not
having done that thing would be telling every one everything.

She being one she was not needing that anything was done. She being that
one and doing everything was doing anything.

She was one and being loving and having been that thing and being one
who, something needing courage to be done, had done that thing and being
one not having done something and being that one, she being that one and
being loving had been loving and having been loving and having been
doing that thing and having been doing everything in doing that thing
she was one and being one she was doing anything and being one she was
that one the one who not needing that anything is done is loving and
having done that thing has been one having been loving.

She in living continued being living and this being what was happening
she was continuing being that one. In continuing being that one she,
doing everything, was continuing and in continuing she was one being one
steadying that continuing is existing. Continuing is existing, she was
being one and being one, continuing not being existing, she would not be
one. She was one and she would be one if she was one. If she was one and
she was one, if she was one she was one continuing. She was one. She was
continuing.

She was one and being one and doing anything she was one continuing and
continuing she was being one who in being one was one who if in doing
something she was needing courage was if she was doing that thing being
that one. She was that one and being one and continuing, continuing
being existing, she was that one, she was that one and doing everything
and not needing that everything, not needing that something, not needing
that anything was done, she was continuing in being one, she was doing
anything, she was continuing she was therefor certainly being one.

She was that one. There are many of them. Why are there many of them.
There are many of them because there are many of each kind there are
and she was of one kind. There are many of them. Why are there many of
such a kind of them. There are many of such a kind of them because that
kind is a kind. That kind is a kind. There are many kinds. That kind is
a kind and any one of that kind of them is one that is being one living
in being living the way that kind of them live in being living. There
are very many of any kind.

There are kinds in women. There are enough kinds and being enough kinds
there are enough of each kind. There are very many of them. Each one is
living. Any one is living. Any one living is in living coming to be
going on living.

One who is one and is an especial one, one who is one and that one is
one and is an especial one, in being one and certainly being a kind of a
one is creating that thing is creating not being a kind of a one is
quite creating that thing. Creating that thing is something. Creating
not being a kind of a one is something. This one being one creating not
being a kind of a one is one and having been creating that thing this
one has been creating everything and creating everything this one is
that one. This one is not a kind of a one. This one is one. She is that
one. She is that one and being one being creative she is creating being
one who is not a kind of a one.

There are many being living who if they were being what they would be
being if they had been created to be creating would have been creating
being one who is not a kind of a one. One who would if she had been
creative would have been creating that she was not a kind of a one was
one who was resisting quite resisting being certain that she was one who
was a kind of a one. She was one who was creating that she would be
resisting being certain that she was a kind of a one. She was one who
being a kind of a one was not listening in creating that she would not
be certain that she was a kind of a one.

She being loving and she was loving, she being loving and not succeeding
not succeeding in being loving, she being loving was feeling that she
was not creating being that one.

She was loving. She being a loving one and being certain that she was
not listening to being a kind of a one and feeling that she was not
completing creating being one was one who not troubling every one in
being one was one feeling any one feeling that she was one as any one
was one feeling that she was one.

Any one was one feeling that she was one and she was that one she was
the one whom any one was feeling was that one. In being that one she was
one deciding that she was not succeeding in being loving. In deciding
that thing she was developing that she was being one who had been one
coming to be one deciding what she would be deciding.

She was one and being one being loving and being one deciding that she
had been one who would be coming to decide what she would decide and
being one expecting to be developing being one who would express that
thing express developing and being one who would be one earning needing
to be expecting to be completing being one, being that one and being one
being loving and being one who was not one succeeding in being loving
she was one who was succeeding. She was succeeding, she was giving that
thing, she was giving that to some.

In understanding anything she was being that one the that one who if she
was feeling would be deciding that the thing she was understanding was a
thing that she should be rejecting and being one accepting what she was
understanding she was being one who was accepting something very often.
In being one she was one accepting something very often and being that
one she was being one feeling in understanding anything, feeling in
understanding and being then that one being one feeling, she was one who
understanding something was deciding that she was one accepting and
rejecting something. In being one understanding anything she would be
one feeling. In understanding anything she was one feeling. In
understanding anything she was one being one who was feeling in being
one who was one who being that one was one having decision in being one
who in understanding anything was rejecting and accepting something. She
being one and having feeling she was one and in understanding anything
she was that one the one understanding something and accepting and
rejecting something. In being that one she was one and in being one she
was feeling and in being one rejecting and accepting something she was
one being one understanding something and having feeling. In being one
having feeling she was being that one and being that one she was one
feeling in understanding something and being that one and accepting and
rejecting something she was one and being that one she was feeling. In
being that one and accepting and rejecting something she was feeling
that in understanding something she was accepting and rejecting
something. In being one she was that one, she was feeling that thing.

In coming and going she was being one expressing enthusiasm and in
expressing enthusiasm she was expressing needing enjoying and in
expressing needing enjoying she was expressing feeling everything and in
expressing feeling everything she was expressing being one coming. In
expressing being one coming she was being one who in being coming was
continuing enthusiasm. In continuing enthusiasm she was one being
loving. In being loving she was being one being feeling. In being
feeling she was one coming and going. In being feeling she was one
coming. In being feeling and going she was one being feeling. In being
feeling she was coming, in being feeling she was going.

She was feeling and coming. She was feeling and going. She was feeling
and coming and going. She was feeling, she was moving, in being feeling
she would be exciting if she were not being so excited in not coming, in
not going, in moving, in feeling, in coming, in going, in enthusiasm.
She was being excited and in being excited and in being one who would be
exciting if she were excited she was feeling and in feeling she had
enthusiasm and in enthusiasm she was being that one the one who was
excited, the one who would be exciting in feeling, in moving, in coming,
in going, in enthusiasm. She would be exciting, she would be exciting if
being excited in enthusiasm, in coming, in going, in moving, in feeling
would be exciting. She was exciting if being excited in feeling, in
enthusiasm, in coming, in going, in moving, in staying is exciting. She
was excited in enthusiasm. She was feeling in staying, in coming, in
going, in feeling, in enthusiasm, in moving. She was enthusiastic in
being one who could be exciting if feeling in enthusiasm, in staying, in
coming, in going, in moving, in listening, in walking were exciting. She
was one feeling, she was one walking and listening and going and staying
and coming and moving, she was one having enthusiasm, she was one being
exciting if one were being exciting in feeling, in walking, in
listening, in staying, in moving, in coming, in going, in having
enthusiasm.

She was one and being one and being that one she was the one who was the
one who in listening, in talking, in walking, in moving, in going, in
coming, in staying, in having enthusiasm was one who was completely one
being one having the enthusiasm in being one who being excited would be
exciting if being that one was being exciting and in being that one she
was the one being all of that one being quite all of that one, being
everything and in being everything and she was being that one she was
one feeling and being one feeling and she being that one and being one
having enthusiasm and she being that one she was being one and she was
all of that one, she was everything, she was that one and being that one
she was one who was one and being one and being the one who was one she
was all of that one and being all of that one she was everything
everything of being one who would be exciting if being all of being the
one who was feeling in enthusiasm, in moving, in staying, in coming, in
going, in listening, in talking, in moving were being one who was
exciting. She was all of that one. She was every bit of that one. In
being every bit of that one she was one and being one she was all of
that one.

This was one who was all of that one. There are many. All of them are
all of the one they are. There are many all of them are not all of the
one they are. There are many. There are very many women. There are very
many living. There are many of them.

One of them and being all of that one is everything and being everything
is exciting. She is not exciting because she is all of that one. She is
not exciting because she is everything. She is exciting. She is
everything. She is all of that one. This one and she is exciting, this
one is feeling and being feeling she is completely exciting and being
completely exciting she is everything and being everything she is all of
that one. She is all of that one. She is every bit of everything. She is
that one the one she is and being that one she is such a one, such a
wonderful one, and being such a wonderful one she is that one and she
being that one she is every bit that one. She is a wonderful one, she is
exciting, she is everything, she is every bit that one. She is the one
who is everything. She is the one who is exciting.

She being exciting and being a wonderful one she is exciting, she being
the one who is exciting is one being feeling and being feeling she is
everything and being everything she is every bit that one.

There is this one. This one is. She is every bit that one.

Any one who is one who is a woman and very many who are ones are being
such ones, all of them are ones who being ones and being ones who are
certainly being careful to go on not doing what they might be doing are
ones who could come to be certain that if they would they could and if
they would they could not do what they might be doing. There are very
many being living. There are some being living. There are some who are
living. There are some.

One was living. She was moving some. She was not going when she was
moving she was moving so as to be where she could see the place where
she had been. She was not moving so as to do that thing. She was not
moving because she wanted to see the place she had been. She was moving
because if she could have what she was needing she would not be having
anything. She was moving and she was not going. She could see the place
where she had been.

She was one. Any one mentioning that thing was mentioning that she was
that one. She was one. In feeling that thing she was not mentioning that
thing she was not mentioning that she was that one.

In moving she was one coming to be mentioning something to every one. In
mentioning something to every one she was mentioning that she had been
moving and had not been going. In mentioning that thing she was
mentioning that she was interesting any one who was interested in that
thing. In mentioning this thing she was being one. She was not
mentioning that thing she was not mentioning that she was one.

In not mentioning that she was one she was being one mentioning
everything. In mentioning everything she was mentioning that she was
telling any one that she was loving some one. In mentioning that she was
telling any one that she was loving some one she was mentioning that she
had come to be certain that loving is existing. In mentioning that she
had come to be certain that loving is existing she was being one who
mentioning everything to every one was one not expecting everything. In
not expecting everything she was one helping any one. In helping any one
she was moving and in moving she was not coming she was not going, she
was moving and she could see from where she was she could see where she
had been, she could see that place then, she could move so as to see any
place where she had been.

In being where she could see any place where she had been she was not
looking. She was moving then. In moving she was moving to where she
could have seen every place where she had been.

In working and she could be working in the evening or in the morning or
in the early part of the afternoon or towards evening, in working and
she could be working and in being one she was working, in working she
was teaching and in teaching she was telling that in working she was
teaching and in teaching she was helping every one, she was helping
herself, she was helping some, she was helping some one.

In being one and having been living she had been one and had not been
telling everything of that thing, she had been one and had been
intending to be one who had not but who would be telling everything of
that thing. In being that one and being living she was one coming to be
telling everything and in telling everything she was one not completing
expecting everything. In not completing expecting everything she was
telling that being one telling something she was continuing being one
telling everything. In continuing telling everything she was not
completing expecting something. In not completing expecting something
she was expecting and expecting she was moving and moving she was where
she could see where she had been and being there she was moving and
moving she was being where she could see where she had been. In being
there she was working. She could work in the evening. She could work in
the morning. She could work in the afternoon. She did work and working
she was teaching and teaching she was telling that she was expecting
everything and expecting everything she was loving and loving she was
telling every one everything.

Being one and that was that thing, being one and helping she was one
expecting to be helping that thing. In expecting to be helping that
thing she was helping anything and helping anything she was being one
teaching and being teaching she was telling something to some.

In telling something to some she was telling that thing again. In
telling that thing again she was telling it again and in telling it
again she was again telling it again and in again telling it again she
was telling it again.

In telling it again she was one being one expecting everything expecting
to be telling it again. In being one expecting to be telling it again
she was being one and being that one she was one expecting everything.
In expecting everything she was being one and being one she was loving
some one and loving some one she was expecting, that one being loving,
she was expecting everything and she was then telling every one that she
was that one she was one, who loving some one and that one loving, was
expecting everything. In telling every one that she was expecting
everything she was telling every one that she was teaching and in
telling every one that she was teaching she was asking every one if any
one was not one who could be one expecting everything.

She was one moving. She was one moving again. If she had been one
looking she could have been seeing from there where she was she could
have been seeing where she had been in being moving. She was not one
looking between moving. In not looking between moving she was hearing
herself asking any one if she would be moving. In asking any one this
thing she was disturbing the one and disturbing the one she had moved
and having moved she moved to where she could look if she did look and
see where she had been. She being that one she was teaching, she being
teaching she was telling something, she being telling something, she was
telling that thing again, she telling that thing again was asking if any
one telling that thing was not one teaching and if any one telling that
thing was teaching was not being one teaching being a thing having the
meaning that in doing anything one was meaning that in helping anything
one was loving. In asking everything she was helping everything, in
helping everything she was asking that she was telling that she was
teaching and doing that thing. In helping everything she was asking if
she was not telling everything. In telling everything she was asking if
she was not teaching. In being teaching she was asking if she was not
loving. In loving she was asking if she was teaching everything. In
teaching everything she was asking if any one needed any helping. In
asking if any one needed any helping she was asking everything. In
asking everything she was asking it again. In asking it again she was
teaching. In teaching she was telling anything. In telling anything she
was telling it again and in telling it again she was asking that, thing
and in asking that thing she was asking it again.

She was that one, she was that one and being that one and telling
something and telling it again she was that one and being that one she
was all of that one and being all of that one she was being one who was
that one.

There are many being living, there are enough of them so that any one
who is wanting to meet all of them can meet very many of them. There are
very many of them. There are enough of them so that every one who can be
taught something by any of them can be one being taught something. There
are very many being living. There are very many.

One who can teach some one everything in teaching that one everything is
teaching that one that everything being something that one can learn
everything from that one. That one being one teaching is one teaching
some one everything. That one being one learning everything is being one
being taught everything by the one that can teach that one everything.
That one the one that can teach some one everything is that one and
being that one and understanding that thing clearly understanding that
thing clearly understanding that she teach some one everything is
telling that thing quite telling that thing and completely often is
beginning to go on teaching teaching everything. Being that one and
being one teaching some one everything that one is that one completely
that one the one teaching to the one learning everything. These then are
two then who are knowing that one can teach everything. These two then
are two mentioning that thing that one can teach one everything. That
one the one teaching is one mentioning quite often mentioning that
thing.

There are many being living. There are enough of them so that every one
can meet some. There is one being living. She is one telling that she
being one being living she is being living enough so that every one
wanting to meet her can ask her if she is the one they are wanting to
have tell them that she being living is living enough to explain all of
that thing.

She being living enough is knowing that any one meeting her is knowing
her enough to know that she being living can explain enough that she is
the one living enough. In being the one knowing that she can explain
enough to any one that she being living enough is that one she is one
knowing that any one she is knowing is knowing her enough to know that
she can explain enough that she is the one who is living enough.

She being one knowing that any one knowing her is knowing her enough to
know that she can explain what she can explain enough she being one
knowing this thing is being one explaining everything enough and in
explaining everything enough she is explaining that she being living she
is living enough to be explaining everything that she explaining enough
is explaining.

She is one explaining enough, she is explaining that thing enough, she
is explaining enough that she is explaining enough. In being that one
she is one telling something. In being one telling something she can be
one telling everything. In being one who can be telling everything she
is telling that she is telling what she is telling.

She could come and coming she would not come again if she were not
certain that in coming again she was feeling and in feeling she was
being that one the one doing all of the right thing that she would have
been deciding to do if she had already come to a decision.

In coming again she would be one telling something and being one telling
something she could come to be one telling everything.

She was one feeling and in feeling she was one going and in going she
was knowing that she would not be explaining enough that she had been
going. In going she was being one and in being that one she was not
telling all of everything and in not telling everything she was knowing
that she could not be explaining enough that she could not tell all of
everything.

In telling anything she was telling something and in telling something
she was telling that that thing was more something than some other thing
and in telling that what she was telling was more something than some
other thing she was telling that she could explain enough that she was
knowing that she could tell something.

In being that one and she was that one, in being that one she was one
explaining enough in explaining enough that she was living enough and
that in living enough any one knowing her was knowing her enough so that
they could know that she was living enough to explain enough.

She being that one and she was that one she was one and any one knowing
her enough was knowing enough that she was that one and knowing enough
that she was that one was knowing that in telling something she was
telling enough to be one who could be enough one telling everything. She
was that one and being that one she was the one who was being that one
and being the one who was being that one she was one who was enough one
and being enough one she was the one who being that one was being one
who was that one. In being one who was that one she was the one who was
one who was being that one.

In talking and any one talking could be one knowing that she was one
talking, in talking and she was talking in telling anything that was
needing that talking is existing, in talking she was one deciding that
not deciding is something and not deciding being something she was one
and could be one who was deciding and deciding was just such a thing.

She was one who had been one and she could remember everything of all of
that thing.

In telling she was telling that it was happening that she could remember
all of everything.

She was telling that if she had not been one remembering everything she
would not be one being the one telling what she was telling. She was
telling that being the one telling what she was telling she had been one
carefully chosen in choosing to be the one she was being.

She was telling that in developing she had not been changing and this
was something that was a curious thing as she was coming to be one
deciding to choose to be changing enough to be telling that which she
was going on telling.

If she had been doing what would be frightening she would have been one
exercising everything. She was one who could be one being an uneasy one
and being one then not remaining interesting. She was not interesting in
not being loving. She was never loving. If she had been loving she would
have liked marrying. In almost following some one she came to be one who
was not a married one. She was not loving. She was not marrying.

She was not at all marrying. If she had been one continuing to be one
staying when she was an uneasy one she might have been one coming to be
marrying. She was an uneasy one and that was a strange thing, she was
an uneasy one in being an ordinary enough one. She was not interesting
in being one not loving. She would not have been loving if she had
followed when she almost followed one. She was not loving when she was
being one being living. She was not loving.

She did what she did, she said that she would do what she did when she
said what she said and she said that she said what she said.

If in remembering everything she followed everything she would remember
very much and she did remember very much, she followed everything she
remembered and she remembered everything.

She could do what she did. In doing what she did she could do everything
she did and in doing everything she did she did everything. In doing
everything she was being that one the one saying that she did everything
she did when she said what she said and she said what she said.

In doing everything she was being one being one attacking and in being
one being attacking she was being one saying that she was only being one
attacking when she was saying what she said and she said what she said.

In being one saying what she said she was being one saying that she was
not saying what she said to be one being the one attacking, she said
that she was one feeling in being one saying what she said and she said
what she said.

In being one saying what she said she said she was being one saying what
she said and having been one saying what she said she was one feeling
and being one feeling she could be one feeling and being one feeling she
was saying that saying what she said was not feeling and feeling was not
what she said when she said she said and she did say what she said and
she was feeling and saying what she said and she had said what she said
she had been feeling.

She could say that she knew some thing. She could say that thing.

Some one knowing something could say something. She said that thing, she
said some one knowing something could say something.

Some did say something. Any one said something. Any one knowing
something and saying something and she saying something she was saying
that having been coming to know what the one knowing something and
saying something was knowing she could say something and saying that,
she could say something that the one saying something had not been
knowing and not been saying. She could say something. Knowing something
she could say something.

Feeling that she had been enjoying she was saying that she had been
enjoying what she had been enjoying and saying that thing she could be
saying that being that one and enjoying something she could say that she
had been enjoying what she had been enjoying.

She said that she would be enjoying something, in saying that thing she
was saying that she would not be enjoying that thing if she would not be
enjoying that thing and she would be saying that she had not enjoyed
that thing if she had not enjoyed that thing.

In helping any one and in being one helping any one she was helping any
one, in helping any one she was saying that she was continuing and being
the one continuing she would be helping any one if she was the one being
the one she was and she was that one and in helping any one she was
helping any one.

Being that one she was the one planning that in continuing she would be
arranging to have something. In arranging to have something, she was not
being one. In being one she was telling something and in telling
something she was hearing that she was one telling something and hearing
that she was one telling something she was telling that in telling
something she was telling what she was telling.

In expecting to be continuing she was feeling and feeling that she
needed something and she was arranging so that she would have something
and in arranging that she would have something she was feeling what she
was telling.

In succeeding she was one who could be the one succeeding in doing what
she was doing. In succeeding she was the one telling what she was
telling, she being one having been hearing what she had been hearing
when she was telling what she was telling.

She was that one. She was the one who was the one that was that one.

Knowing that any one is doing what that one is doing, suspecting that
any one is the one that one is, is what some one, who is one and is all
of the one who is what she is, is completely doing. This one the one who
is all of what she is, is one suspecting that any one is what they are,
is knowing that any one is doing what they are doing. She is all of that
one and being all of that one is knowing everything, is suspecting
everything. She is suspecting anything and in suspecting anything is
deciding to be suspecting something and in suspecting that thing is
suspecting that every one is doing what every one is doing. She is
knowing anything and knowing anything of any one is one deciding that
something she is knowing of every one is what every one is and she is
knowing everything. She is that one. She is all of that one. She being
all of that one and suspecting everything and knowing everything is all
of one.

There are some suspecting something. There are some knowing something.
There are some knowing and suspecting something.

One was knowing that some one should not continue to show to some one
something. She was suspecting that the one looking at what some one was
continuing to show him was saying what would discourage the one showing
something. She was one knowing something and suspecting something. She
was one.

She was one and being that one there were very many little ones. She was
one and being that one and there being another one she was one feeling
that she would not be continuing to live long.

She was living and in living she was exercising that living is existing.
She was living and she was exhausting continuing being living. She was
living and being that one she was living.

She could be one. In being one she was not saying that she was that one
the one she was being, she was not saying anything.

She could be one. She was saying something. She was saying that she
liked some things.

She could be one. She was one. She was not saying anything. She could be
one. She was not saying anything.

She could be one. In not saying anything she was not saying anything of
that thing. She was not saying anything of not saying anything.

She could be one. She was one. She was saying something. She was saying
that anything is something. She was saying that something which is
something is everything and that everything is not something and not
being something she would be suspecting that in continuing it was not
everything. She was not saying anything of this thing.

She could be one accompanying some one and always accompanying some one
she could always have been listening. In being one who could always have
been listening she was one not saying anything. In being one not saying
anything she was one suspecting what she was suspecting. In being one
suspecting she was one deciding and in deciding she was arranging and in
arranging she was continuing that the one she was accompanying was not
showing what he might have been showing.

In being one she was one and in being one she was one who accompanying
and could be listening and suspecting and deciding and arranging and
continuing and being that one was one living long enough in being that
one to have been one being one expecting enough of not continuing being
living.

There are many living and any of them can be one being that one be one
being living and any of them being one being living can be one saying
something and deciding anything.

One and one was one, one and she was a woman would have been a younger
one in being a woman if she had not been an older one in being a woman.
In being an older one in being a woman she was one being a younger one,
she was one being an old one, a young one, an older one, a younger one,
she was one being a woman and being that one was one being one. In being
one she was being living and being living she was that one that woman
and being that woman she was always all of that one a young one, an old
one, a younger one, an older one. She was that one. She was that woman.
Being that one she was all of that one and being all of that one she was
that woman and being that woman she was all of that one.

There are many being living. One being living and saying something and
deciding anything was an older one and being an older one was
remembering enough of having been a younger one and was remembering
enough of going to be an older one. She was one remembering enough.

She was one feeling in remembering enough. She was one talking in
remembering enough. She was one explaining that she was being living and
that she was remembering enough.

In being living she was one remembering enough that she had been a
younger woman, that she would be an older woman. In being living she was
remembering enough that in being living she could have what she was
having and that she had been remembering enough of what she had been
having, what she was having.

She was one, and being living was enough that thing to be a thing that
she could remember enough. She was living and she could remember enough
of having been a younger woman, of being an older woman, of coming to be
an older woman, of coming to be an old woman.

She being one was remembering that she was that one. She remembering
that she was that one was remembering it enough to be one having done
what she had done and being that one. She having done what she had done
and being that one she was one living and remembering enough that she
was that one and she was one arranging what she was intending to
continue to be arranging and she was one remembering enough.

That is the end of that and she was one being one. Any being one is one
some are describing. Any one being one is one that one is describing.

Some one being one and being the one being beautifully described as
completely beautiful one, that one being the one being beautifully
described and being beautifully described very often as being
beautifully that one, as being a beautiful one, that one being one is
one some describe, that one being one is one that one describes. That
one being one and being described beautifully as a beautiful one is one
that that one describes and that one describing that one is describing
everything of that one and describing everything of that one is
describing anything of that one and describing anything of that one is
describing that one and describing that one is something that some can
do in beautifully describing that one as beautiful one.

Any one being one is one some are describing. One being one is one some
are describing. One being one is one some are describing and they are
describing that one as a pretty one and describing that one as a pretty
one they are describing that one to be a pretty one and describing that
one to be a pretty one and describing that one they are describing that
one. In describing that one they are describing something and describing
something they are succeeding in describing and succeeding in describing
they are describing that one a pretty one.

She was one that one, she was one being one having come to be that one
in having been one who had been one and always would be one having come
to be that one and having come to be that one she was being that one and
being that one she was describing herself as being one having been one
and having come to be that one and having come to be that one to be one
then being one describing herself as being that one.

She having been one she was remembering that she was not being one
having been one. She was being one being one and being one expressing
that being one is expressing everything.

She was one and she was one hoping that being one and expressing
conviction she was one remembering everything.

If she was a pretty one and she was a pretty one if she was a pretty one
she was expressing that being that one she was hoping that she was
completing hoping everything.

She was that one. She was hoping that she was completing hoping
everything. She was that one she was expressing that she was being one
remembering that she was not being one having been one. She was that
one, she was expressing that hearing that she was that one she was
succeeding in expressing that continuing is succeeding in hoping
everything.

She was one and being that one and continuing she had happen what did
happen and that was something that could not happen to every one and
that was something that she being one was not continuing to be
accepting. In not continuing to be accepting that thing she was not
completing anything and in being one succeeding in hoping everything
that thing was continuing.

She did say what she did say. She did say she was continuing. She did
say that she was succeeding in hoping everything. She did say that she
was feeling what she was feeling about any one being one and hoping
everything. She did what she did say. She did do all of that thing.

She was one and being one and being one remembering what she could
remember she was remembering she was being one and being one enough were
certain that she being that one she was quite being one and quite being
one she was a pretty one and being a pretty one she was one and was not
being that one in being that one.

In not being that one in being that one she was being that one and being
that one and being the one who did say what she did say she was being
the one being that one and being the one being that one she was not the
one being that one in being the one being that one.

She did say what she did say. She did say what she did say when she did
say what she did say and she did say what she did say.

She did say that succeeding in hoping everything is all of that thing
and saying this thing she did say this thing and she did say this thing
in saying this thing. She did say what she did say. She did say that she
did say that succeeding in hoping everything is what any one succeeding
in hoping everything is succeeding in. She did say what she did say. She
did say this thing in saying this thing. She did say what she did say.
She did say that she was one being one who was one succeeding in hoping
everything. She did say what she did say. She did say this thing in
saying this thing. She did say that any one succeeding in hoping
everything is succeeding in hoping everything. She did say this thing in
saying this thing.

A little one who is little enough to be a big one and who is big enough
to be a little one is that one and being that one is one and that one is
that one and that one is one and she is one who does not say what she
does not say and saying everything is saying something every day of not
saying what she does not say. This one is one. She is a big one and a
little one and she is one and she says she does not say what she does
not say. In saying that she does not say what she does not say she says
everything. She is the one. She is one satisfying one.

In being one satisfying every one that that one is some one some one is
satisfying every one that she is some one. She is that one. She is one
and satisfying any one that she is some one. She is one. She is some
one. She is satisfying, she is satisfying every one that she is some
one.

She, she could feel in being that one, was feeling in being that some
one who was satisfying every one that she was some one. Feeling was
delivering that she was giving everything that she was getting.

Effecting that she had been learning she completed keeping what she had
been getting. She was and is one restraining what she could see moving.
She was one feeling. She is one feeling.

She was continuing and was not burying what was not growing. She is
continuing and what is growing is filling and what is filling is
burrowing and what is burrowing is what is moving and what is moving is
showing that moving is not steadying. She is one and she is convincing
any one that she was that one. She is one and satisfying every one that
she is some one is something.

She, she was expecting what she had been saying, she was attacking what
she was expecting, was one satisfying every one of being one, she being
one, believing what attacking, what expecting, what believing, what
saying is meaning. She had begun and what she had begun was what was
meaning to be what she, satisfying every one that she was some one, was
expressing in believing that attacking, that believing, that expecting,
that giving what she would be receiving was meaning.

She satisfying every one that she was some one in saying what was coming
was saying what she was expecting to be saying in attacking what she was
attacking in believing what she was believing in meaning meaning what
was winning in giving what she would be receiving.

She satisfying every one that she was some one was satisfying herself
then that she was saying what expecting to be saying was attacking whom
she was attacking in subduing what she was subduing in believing that
she was meaning what she was meaning in giving what she would be
receiving and in giving what she was giving. She satisfying every one
that she was some one was satisfying herself that saying what she was
expecting to be saying was subduing what she was expecting to be
subduing, and she being one satisfying every one that she was some one
was one feeling what she was feeling in giving what she would be
receiving, and she being one satisfying every one that she was some one
was believing what she was believing in giving what she was giving, and
she being one satisfying every one that she was some one was one being
one being one not having moving what was not moving and being one
feeling that what was not moving was being what it was being and she
being one satisfying every one that she was one feeling that she was not
burying what she was not burying, and she being one satisfying every one
that she was some one was being what she was being she being one
satisfying every one that she was some one.

She, she working was arranging that having teaching was what she had not
been burying in not burying what she was not burying, cleaning was
continuing that she was arranging what she would be arranging in being
one satisfying what she was satisfying in being one and satisfying every
one that being one she was some one who was some one.

She in satisfying every one was satisfying every one that she was some
one and in satisfying every one in satisfying every one that she was
some one was satisfying every one that she was some one and in
satisfying every one that she was some one she was one who was, in
satisfying every one that she was some one, was satisfying every one
that she was some one.

She, she was expecting what she was arranging and was arranging to be
saying what she was saying, giving what she would be receiving was
feeling what she was receiving in giving what she was receiving. She was
believing what she was giving in receiving, and giving what she was
receiving and receiving what she was giving she was feeling what she was
believing. Feeling what she was believing she was not burying what she
was not burying, she was not feeling what she was not feeling, she was
believing what she was believing, she was expecting what she was
arranging, she was satisfying in satisfying and in satisfying she was
satisfying every one that she was some one.

In developing, and she had been developing that she developing was
developing, in developing, and she had been developing in continuing
believing and she was believing, in developing she had developed and
having developed she was being what in being is meaning that she is
being. She being and meaning being in being she was being and she being
being was meaning and she being was meaning what she being was meaning.
She being she was meaning. She was meaning and she was being. She was
being what in being is meaning that she is being.

She, she was being and being was meaning that she was being and meaning
what she was being, she continuing was remaining and having been
remaining something was not coming and something not coming she was
being and she being she was meaning and meaning she was meaning what she
was being. She was satisfying every one that she was some one.

When she came to having been and being and continuing being that one she
was one and being that one was meaning to be that one and was meaning
being that one and was satisfying and satisfying was satisfying every
one and satisfying every one was satisfying every one that she was some
one. In having come to be that one and continuing and being that one and
not burying anything in not burying anything and being that one in
meaning that thing in meaning being that one and being one satisfying in
meaning, in being that one who was one who was satisfying every one that
she was some one in continuing having come to be that one she was one
coming to be expecting to not bury what she was not burying and in
expecting that thing she was not expecting what she was not expecting,
she was not expecting and not expecting she was not expecting and she
was not expecting and not expecting and giving what she was receiving
she was not burying what she was not burying and she was not expecting
and she was satisfying every one that she was some one and satisfying
every one that she was some one and being one and meaning and believing
she was satisfying every one that she was some one and she was not
expecting and she was giving what she was receiving and she was being
what in being is meaning that she is being and she is being meaning what
she is meaning in being and she is being and being she is satisfying
every one that she is some one.

In coming to be one needing to be burying what she would be burying she
was one coming to not burying what she was uncovering. That being
uncovered was being what she would be burying if she could come to be
burying what she was not coming to be burying. She was changing, that is
in satisfying every one that she was some one she was satisfying every
one that she was continuing being some one and in satisfying every one
that she was continuing being some one she was satisfying herself that
she was satisfying every one that she was some one. She was some one,
she was satisfying herself in satisfying every one that she was some
one. She was satisfying herself that she was continuing satisfying every
one that she was some one. She was satisfying every one that she was
some one.

In arranging, and she was arranging in believing what she was
believing, in arranging she was continuing arranging what she was
arranging in believing what she was believing. In arranging she was
continuing in arranging and in continuing in arranging she was believing
what she was believing. She was believing what she was believing. She
was arranging in arranging and she was continuing in arranging and she
was believing what she was believing and she was arranging in arranging.
She was satisfying every one that she was some one. She was satisfying
herself that she was satisfying every one that she was some one. She was
believing what she was believing. She was arranging and believing what
she was believing. She was believing what she was believing.

If she was one satisfying every one that she was some one, and she was
one satisfying every one that she was one, she was one and she was
satisfying every one that she was some one, if she was that one she
would be changing in coming to be the one she was being when she was
being the one she was being in being one who was being that one. In
being the one she was being in being the one she was when she was the
one she was she was being one and looking she was feeling what being
that one she was feeling. She was showing all of this thing and showing
all of this thing and showing anything she was showing all of being the
one being the one she was and being that one. In showing all of being
that one she was looking and looking she was feeling that being one
showing anything she was being the one having what she was having, and
having what she was having she was one to be continuing, if showing
anything is meaning nothing, she was one to be continuing having what
she was having, she being one believing what she was believing and being
one satisfying every one that she was some one.

If any one continuing is coming to be a dead one they could then have
come to be what they had come to be but if they had not come to be a
dead one they had not come to be what they had come to be. She had not
come to be a dead one. She had not come to be what she would come to be.

Each one is one, there are many of them. Each one, every one, all of
them, any of them, one of them, one of them, each one being, every one
being, any one is the one and the one is the one and any history is the
meaning of the one not meaning what any meaning is meaning.

One is one. Why is one one. One is one because one being one is sweetly
telling that thing and sweetly telling that thing is sweetly telling
that that one being one is meaning, and not meaning what any meaning is
meaning, is being the one sweetly telling that that one is hearing that
that one sweetly telling that, that that one, is one is sweetly telling.

One is one if one were one and sweetly telling something that one would
be telling something sweetly. Any one can be telling that that one is
not sweetly telling anything. This one is one. She is one and is telling
that she has been telling delicately telling what she would have been
sweetly telling if she had not been telling what she has been telling.
She is telling what she is telling and telling that she is telling that
thing as she would be telling that thing if she were sweetly telling
that thing.

She is one and telling is what she is doing in telling what she is
telling, and that telling is what she is excelling in telling she is
telling, in the way she would be telling what she is telling if she were
sweetly telling what she is telling. She is convincing, she is
convincing in telling that she is telling what she is telling in the way
she would be telling what she is telling if she were sweetly telling
what she is telling.

She is that one. She was the one telling that she is feeling that some
one is telling what that one is telling and is sweetly telling what that
one is telling. The one the one who is telling what she is telling
sweetly, so some one telling is telling, that one is telling what she is
telling and she is remembering that she has not been telling what she
could have been telling and that she is telling what she is telling. She
is remembering that she is telling what she is telling. She is feeling
that being that one the one she is is fatiguing, she is telling that she
soon will be continuing to be being the one she will be and telling is
what any one expecting anything will not then be expecting. She is one
living in remembering that she is being one who could be one continuing
being one remembering that she was telling what she was telling. She was
one being one expecting to be continuing to be resting, having come to
be one who can be continuing to be telling what she is remembering she
is telling. She is one remaining where she is remaining in continuing to
be remembering that she is telling what she is telling. She is one
remembering that telling what she has been telling has been continuing
to be fatiguing. She is one expecting some one and the one she is
expecting is one telling that she is not needing to be telling what she
is telling, she is just needing to be talking and needing to be talking
she is not needing anything. The one expected is the one not needing
anything and being talking is telling that she has been needing
something and has been needing talking. She has been talking and not
needing anything has been getting what she was needing being getting so
that when she is talking some one can be listening, when she is walking
some one can be looking, when she is fixing something some one can be
stopping. She is that one. She has returned and is telling that she has
come and telling that she has come she is telling that needing talking
is not being needing anything. She is not telling what she is
remembering of having been needing talking as she is remembering that
she has not been needing anything. She is that one.

When any one is gone and is not coming again that one is gone and is not
coming again and being gone and being not coming again some one saying
something is saying that not any one is saying that thing. That is all
that is said by that one.

One who is saying what is clearly said, one who is saying anything that
is clearly said, that one is saying that saying something is not at all
exhausting and that one clearly saying everything is not being exhausted
and not being exhausted and being clearly having clear things coming is
for that reason just then so clearly that one that any one can see
enough to look again and again. That one is that one. That one is then
for that reason that one and one looking is looking. That one is clearly
that one. That one is always so clearly that one that one looking is
looking and looking.

Some one is one. Some one being one is expecting what not having been
one she would not have been expecting and being one she was one
completing expecting, she came to be completing expecting. She came to
be that one. She came to be one.

Being one and completing expecting she had what she had and she kept all
that and was completing expecting. She had come to receive what she
could keep and she had come to be one and was completing expecting.

In coming to receive what she could keep, she did keep what she could
receive, and she was one and she was completing expecting. She was one
and she was completing expecting and she had been one having all she was
having. In having been one having all she was having she had been one
being that one.

In suffering she was bewildering, and in losing what she had been having
she had been suffering, and in having been suffering and in continuing
she was completing having been expecting completing that thing. She was
expecting completing that thing completing continuing she having been
one suffering and continuing. She was one continuing, she was one
expecting completing, she was one expecting to be completing.

In being one she could be bewildering and she was one continuing and
expecting completing. In suffering she was bewildering and she was one
continuing and she was one expecting to be completing and being one. In
continuing she could be bewildering and she was one expecting completing
being that one and she was one expecting completing and she was one
having all she was having and she was one having expecting completing in
that thing.

In being that one and she had come to be that one and she was having
what she was having and she was expecting completing, in being that one
she was one, and being one, and deciding she was one having what she was
having, and she was expecting completing, and she was having receiving
that she was expecting completing and being continuing in deciding
continuing bewildering in having been losing and in having what she was
having. She had come to continuing coming to being that one, and being
that one she was expecting completing, and having what she was having
and continuing in deciding being continuing in bewildering in having
what she was having. She was deciding that she was continuing and having
what she was having and deciding and continuing bewildering and having
lost what she had lost. She was continuing, she was having what she was
having, she was deciding to be continuing and having what she was having
and having lost what she had lost. She was deciding to be continuing and
she was bewildering and deciding to be continuing and she was having
what she was having.

She did say that she was that one and was deciding to be expecting to be
that one. She was continuing and was expecting to be that one and she
was that one and she did say that she was that one.

When she continued saying that she was that one she was having what she
was having and was continuing expecting to be that one and she was not
denying that being one having lost what she had lost she was bewildering
in being one expecting to be that one. In expecting to be that one she
did say that she was that one and that she deciding was completely
deciding that she was continuing being that one.

She might have arranged that thing arranged deciding to be that one if
she had not been one being that one and having what she was having and
being one deciding to be expecting that she was continuing being that
one.

She did decide that she was expecting continuing being that one, she did
have what she did have, she did decide to continue deciding to be that
one, she did not arrange to be that one, she did not decide to arrange
to be that one, she did not decide to expect to be that one, she did
have what she did have, she did continue to be that one, she did lose
what she had lost and she did decide to continue to be that one. She did
not ask what she did not ask, she did decide, and not asking what she
did not ask and having what she did have she did decide to continue to
be that one. In not asking what she did not ask she did not refuse what
she did not refuse and in not refusing what she did not refuse she did
decide to continue to decide what she did decide in continuing to be
that one. She did decide to continue to be expecting to be that one and
continuing to be that one she did say that she was expecting to be
continuing being that one. Having what she had she was not arranging to
decide what in deciding to be continuing expecting to be that one she
was continuing to decide.

If any one needing loving is being one and being loving could be doing
what that one is doing then that one giving loving is giving what that
one the one loving could be giving if that one were giving what that one
is giving. Such a one is one. Any one who is such a one is such a one.

One who is one and is not such a one is one who is one is one who giving
and loving and needing is giving and loving and needing and could not
have been giving without loving and could not have been loving without
needing and could not have been needing without giving and could not
have been giving and loving and needing without having been giving and
needing and loving. One who is loving and giving and needing is one
completely giving and completely loving and completing needing.

That one is one. That one the one who is one is one. That one the one
who is the one that is that one is one, is the one who is that one.

One who is one giving is one who would be one giving if that one were
one who was loving. That one is one being certain that she being one who
is giving would be one giving if she were one who was loving. She being
one is certain that she could be one needing. She is one giving, she
could be certain that she could be one needing. She being one being
giving might be believing that she could be one being loving. She being
one being giving might be feeling that she might have been one who being
loving in being needing. She was one and she could be one being giving
and she might be one being needing and she was being one loving. She was
one and loving and giving and needing was not loving and giving and
needing it was that she being one and giving was one intending needing,
was one arranging expecting loving. She was that one. She was one
giving, she was one who could be one continuing, she was one who might
be loving, she was one expecting needing. She was one.

If she had been continuing being a young one she would have been one
having what she was having. She was continuing being a young one. In
having what she was having she was one not loving. In giving what she
was giving she was being that one and being that one if she were
continuing being a young one she was one who had been giving what she
had been giving. She was continuing being a young one, she had been
giving what she had been giving, if she were not continuing being a
young one she would be being giving what she was giving. She was giving
what she was giving, she was continuing being a young one.

She was having what she was having, she was giving what she was giving,
she could be loving in loving, she could be needing in needing, she
could be giving in giving, she could be having in having, she could be
continuing being a young one.

Continuing being a young one is something if being a young one is
anything and being a young one is something if continuing being a young
one is anything. Continuing being a young one is something.

One who was a young one and was continuing being a young one was one who
being a young one was being that one and continuing being a young one
was being that one and being that one and being a young one that one was
one and anything is something and that one is a young one and that one
continuing is a young one and something is something.

Any one having been listening and having been gently not being
delicately listening that one is one expressing something of succeeding
in living. One expressing something of succeeding in living is such a
one.

She is such a one and she is one continuing when continuing is not
everything and when not continuing is not anything. She is such a one
and she is living and she is expressing something of succeeding in
living.

She came and there were others and they all of them lost something and
she expressed something of succeeding in living. She came and was one
continuing to coming to being one who was one gently not delicately
listening. She was one gently doing what she was doing not delicately
listening. She was filling more of expressing something of succeeding in
living.

She did resist something and that was not anything and she did resist
that thing and she was not expressing not quite expressing that she was
continuing resisting what she was resisting. She was continuing and
could be expressing that what she was resisting was not anything and she
would then be expressing that had she been resisting she would have been
resisting what she had been resisting and she had been resisting what
she had been resisting. She was expressing something of succeeding in
living. She was continuing. She was filling being expressing something
of succeeding in living.

She was not delicately listening. She was gently not delicately
listening. She was continuing to be hearing what she was hearing. She
had been hearing she was hearing something of some succeeding in living.
She was gently not delicately listening. She was expressing something of
succeeding in living. She was continuing. She was filling expressing
something of succeeding in living.

One who was clearly and happily agreeing that she was amiably feeling in
wanting to be winning was one resisting what she was resisting was
deciding was not opposing. She was happily and clearly feeling that she
was explaining that she was having in amiable feeling a way of being of
amiable feeling and she was happily and clearly deciding and deciding
she was correcting and correcting she was convincing and convincing she
was not regretting. She was happily and clearly being. She was happily
and clearly feeling. She was one who was clearly the one amiably
feeling. She was one who was happily the one amiably feeling. She was
clearly one who was an amiable one. She was happily one who was an
amiable one. She was happily and clearly the one who clearly was amiably
one. She was clearly and happily the one who happily was amiably one.
One who was clearly, one who was happily amiably one was happily, was
clearly an amiable one, the amiable clearly, happily, clearly amiable
one. One who was one was one clearly. One who was one was one happily.
One who was one was one amiably. One who was the one was an amiable one.

However it came to be that so very many were living it did come to be
that some of them continuing were living. Many of them were living, and
continuing, some of them came together and continued that way then. One
of them was one who if she had been an amiable one would have been
continuing being an amiable one and she was continuing and was being an
amiable one and she had been one being an amiable one. She was not
needing that thing needing being an amiable one. Not any of them were
needing that thing needing being amiable ones. All of them who were
being together then were continuing and she was the one who was one of
them and she was continuing. She was one. She could be, she was, she
would be an amiable one.

She was one. She was that one. She was continuing. She was living. She
was being. She was meaning. She was remaining. She was counting. She was
planning. She was having. She was pleasing. She was giving. She was
keeping. She was feeling. She was worrying. She was continuing.

She was not needing to be wearing what she was not giving and getting.
She was not needing to be changing what she had arranged to be changing.
She was feeling in having what she was deciding to be having. She did
have children. She did have a married living. She did have many living
and living she was living with many and many were living. She was
continuing to be counting what she was arranging. She was having what
she would be doing. She was quieting what she could be feeling. She was
resting what she had been feeling. She was continuing regretting what
she could have been saying. She was filling everything she was arranging
to be filling when she was counting.

She did have what she was being. She did give what she was offering. She
did feel what she was filling. She did please in being occupying. She
did do what was continuing. She did satisfy in having children. She did
arrange in doing counting. She did turn in being wounding. She did
consider in being forgiving. She did thank in receiving attention. She
did distribute in being enjoying. She did continue in being yielding.
She did remain in being sweetening. She did resist in being accepting.
She did enjoy in being satisfying. She did receive in having marrying.
She did continue in being affectionate in having, in giving, in
receiving, in marrying, in resisting in spoiling in expecting in
attending in deploring in obeying in enjoying her children. She did
continue in expecting weakening. She did continue in hoping
strengthening. She did continue in worrying eating. She did continue in
rounding fading. She did continue in attending living. She did continue
in enjoying feeling not being denying. She did continue in having been
arranging to be counting worrying. She did continue in being
affectionate in weakening. She did continue pleasing in declining. She
did continue receiving what she would be having. She did continue having
what was being. She did continue being what all of them were being who
were living. She did continue being as she was being living. She did say
all of enough of that thing. She did say what she said of being living.
She did feel what she felt of continuing. She was what she had been in
being. She was what she was and she was all there was and that was all
of that one. She was continuing in arriving where she would be fading.
She was weakening in aging where she would be ceasing.

She was giving what she had for giving. She was feeling what she had in
being. She was receiving what she used in living. She was paying in
every day arranging.

She was filling what was not needing emptying. She was deciding what
would not have been changing. She was keeping what was not gathering.
She was renewing what was continuing.

She was being and she was living. She was having what was enjoying. She
was doing what was collecting. She was giving what was continuing. She
was receiving what was gathering. She was hearing what was sounding. She
was losing what was fading. She was saying which was enjoying and
conditioning. She was accepting which was pleasing. She was resenting
which was resisting. She was suffering which was accusing. She was
worrying which was counting. She was reflecting which was grieving. She
was being which was accepting. She was laughing which was completing.

If there were many and there are many, if there were many then some of
them would be satisfying any one and some of them are not satisfying any
one and some of them are satisfying any one. And any one who is
satisfied by some of them is satisfied because they are satisfactory the
ones that satisfy them.

One to be satisfying must be satisfying. One is satisfying. That one
being satisfying and not deceiving and not beguiling and not resisting
only detaining is one completing being that one being satisfying. That
one being one and being satisfying is being the one being completely
satisfying. Completing satisfaction is completely being that one.

There are some being living, there are those and those all of them are
doing what they are doing. One of them is one being an old one and
having come then to be receiving worrying about coming to be a sick one.
She has been one who has come to something.

She and she herself had come to something and was succeeding in having
had what she had given to be needing to be receiving what she was
receiving, she was not asking what any one could be answering she was
asking that she should continue to give what she gave and get what she
got.

If she were quietly doing what she was doing she would be receiving what
she was receiving but she would not be having what she was having and
she would not have been asking what she had been asking.

She did give every one she was needing what she was needing to give to
them. She was feeling what she came to be feeling when she came to have
what she was having.

She came to want to be enjoying what she was feeling in doing what she
was doing. She came to feel that she was having what she was having and
she might be doing what she was doing.

She was feeling what she was feeling in loving what she was loving in
having what she was having. She came to feel that she was feeling what
she was feeling in needing to be having what she was having. She came
to feel that she was feeling that she was having what she was having and
that she might be doing what she was doing in feeling what she was
feeling.

When she was succeeding she was succeeding in living and when she was
succeeding in living she was feeling what she was feeling and she was
doing what she was doing. She was feeling what she was feeling and she
was doing what she was doing.

Succeeding in living she was placing what she was placing and helping
what she was helping and following what she was following and doing what
she was doing and feeling what she was feeling.

She was continuing in expecting to be placing what she was placing. She
was continuing in expecting to have been having what she had been
having.

She was coming to continuing fearing what she could be fearing. She was
continuing having been feeling what she had been feeling.

She had been asking what she had been asking. She was continuing to be
receiving what she had been asking. She was willing to be changing what
she was seeing when she was looking. She was willing to be seeing what
she was seeing when she was looking. She was willing to be having what
she was asking. She was needing to be doing what she was doing in asking
what she was asking in receiving what she was receiving. She was willing
to be feeling what she was feeling. She was coming to be doing what she
was not needing to be doing to be having what she was having.

To direct everything so that what comes is coming is doing what one
knowing what everything is and being directing can be doing. Succeeding
in directing is something.

One who is one and is knowing what everything is could be directing and
she is directing that is she is reasoning and being reasonably
understanding what everything is can be directing so that what comes is
coming. She being that one is rightly judging everything. She being that
one and saying that to be always right she must be wrong quite often,
she being that one and always being correct in judging and complete in
knowing what everything is and reasonable in telling and firm in
directing she is one and what comes is coming. She is one and knowing
what everything is and being one clearly expressing that thing and
firmly directing she is one curing what would need curing if she were
not being the one directing that which she is directing which is
certainly all of the two of them. She is the one knowing all of what
everything is and directing what she is directing, and she is that one
of the two of them and what comes is coming and she is directing, and
she is correcting what is to be coming and she is knowing what
everything is and reasonably telling and quite curing what might be
needing curing if curing were needing to be continuing. She is quite
that one. She is a lovely one. She is a directing one. She is a one
knowing what everything is.

There are some who are succeeding in placing what they are placing,
there are some who are marshalling all of what they are placing. There
is one and she is directing all she is directing and she is succeeding
in being and any of that being everything she is everything in failing.

She is that one. She had seven and she arranged that all of them would
be all of them and that she was placing what she was placing.

She was sitting and sitting was not everything. She was sitting and she
would be placing what she was placing when all of them had been all of
them.

All of them were all of them. All of them had been all of them. They
were coming all of them were coming, some of them were coming that all
of them were not all of them. All of them were not coming. All of them
were all of them.

She was sitting and when she was not leaving she was not remembering
everything. When she did remember everything she was sitting and keeping
what she had had when she was sitting.

In succeeding in continuing she had been succeeding in living and all of
them were all of them and she was placing what she was placing and she
was not coming to what she was coming and all of them were not coming to
be all of them and they were then what they were then when not any of
them were all of them and some of them might have been all of them.

She was one and she had what she had when she was coming to having been
placing what she would have been placing if all of them being all of
them all of them had been all and some of them had been all of them.

In not having what she was having and sitting she was receiving what she
would be having if she had been having what she was having in placing
what she was placing.

She placing what she was placing and all of them being all of them she
sitting was not standing and not standing she was receiving what she
would be receiving in placing what she was placing, all of them being
all of them. She was placing what she was placing. She was receiving
what she would be receiving. In remembering what she was remembering she
was receiving what she would be receiving.

She could be intending. She was placing what she was placing. She was
saying what she was saying when she was sitting.

She was intending that all of them were all of them. Some of them were
intending that all of them were all of them.

She could be intending. She had been, she was intending that all of them
were all of them. She was continuing, she could be intending.

All of them could be all of them and they were all of them and she was
continuing and she could be intending. She could be intending. She was
intending that all of them were all of them and some of them were
intending that all of them were all of them. Some were hoping to be
intending that all of them were some of them. Some were intending that
some of them were enough of them. They all could be intending. All of
them were all of them.

She was placing what she was placing. In placing what she was placing
she was showing what she was having. In showing what she was having she
was placing all of them so that all of them were all of them. In placing
all of them so that all of them were all of them she was using what she
was having. In using what she was having she was showing that all of
them were all of them. She was placing what she was placing.

She was saying what she was saying when she was sitting. She was
sitting. She was saying what she was saying when she was sitting. In
sitting and saying what she was saying when she was sitting she was
intending to be saying that she was saying what she was saying. She was
sitting and all of them were all of them.

Anything being together and there being pieces that are being used and
all the pieces are being used and all of them had placed on them what
was placed for them and they being where they had been again and again,
all of them being there then and they could be there and nothing was
anything and there was there not anything she was placing what she was
placing and all of them were all of them and that was too much of that
thing in all of them having been continuing and all of them not coming
to use anything, and she was placing what she was placing and all of
them all of them being all of them all of them were coming to intending
and all of them coming to intending she was sitting and sitting was that
thing. All of them intending all of them a piece being on all of them, a
piece being on all of them some of them, anything being together all of
them were all of them. All of them were all of them. She was placing
what she was placing. All of them were all of them.

She sitting and sitting being that thing, she sitting and all of them
being all of them and she having not been completing that thing
completing sitting she was not completing that something would not be
together if a piece was on each one of them. All of them were all of
them. They were losing in using what they were using in a piece not
being on each one of them. They were not losing in all of them coming to
be intending. They were losing in coming and they were coming to be
intending. She did sit and she did not do that thing, she did place what
she placed and she did not do that thing. She was sitting.

If she had the way of sitting and she did not have a way of sitting she
would keep in being what she did have in sitting. She did not have a way
of sitting. In sitting she did have in being what she was not losing and
not losing she did not give anything of sitting. She did not give
anything of sitting. She did not have a way of sitting.

She did not have a way of sitting. She was not being in continuing
sitting. She did not lose being sitting. She did not lose sitting. She
did not keep in sitting. She had sitting. She was having sitting. In
having sitting she did change what she did not change in placing what
she was not placing. In continuing she did not change when she was
remaining in having been moving being sitting. In having been sitting
she was not sitting. She was not sitting in the way of sitting. She was
sitting in having been continuing remaining in having moved in sitting.
She was not being in not sitting. She was not being sitting. She was not
being, not sitting, sitting. She was intending in sitting, in saying
what she could be saying.

A little one who could not push did push and pushing was telling that
pushing was not succeeding. A little one pushing is a little one
pushing.

She could tell all about pushing. She could tell and she did tell all
about not pushing. She did tell and she could tell that having had what
she had had she would have what she would have, and she did have what
she did have and she did tell what she did tell.

Some are some. Some being some and one telling them that that one is one
not telling what she might be telling if she had been listening when she
was listening they are hearing that she is not telling what she is not
telling and all of them she and they are all continuing in friendly
living. She is telling that hearing is something. She is telling that
listening is something. She is telling that telling is something. She is
telling that she is hearing, that she is not listening, that she is not
telling.

In living and in repeating she was determining in being exciting. In
being exciting she was not living and in living she was not continuing
and she was being the one conveying being exciting.

She did feel that which feeling she did have as being. She did begin
what she was finishing and she did not continue hearing when she was
listening.

In having been feeling she was saying that she had been giving up what
she could be needing and in giving it up she had been doing without it.
She was saying that she had been feeling in being living, and being
living and continuing she was being not having given up everything.

In being married and feeling she was married and was conveying that
thing that she was continuing. In having children and she had two
children she was feeling what she feeling. She was feeling what she was
feeling. She was feeling something. She was saying what she was saying.
She was saying what she was feeling. She was saying that she could
determine not coming to be exciting. She was saying that she could say
what had meaning.

In having children and arranging she was conveying that arranging can be
something and that she was not arranging what would be arranged.

She had two children. She was feeling what she was feeling. She felt
that she had had two children and having two children one of them was
one and the other one was the other one.

She had them and she needed being living to be feeling what she was
feeling in having them. She needed being living and being living she was
not needing what she was needing in conveying being exciting and having
the one child and the other child.

One was one and was like that one, was one being that one and being
completely like that one in being one. She had that thing having that
one and having that one she was needing being living to be feeling what
she was feeling in that one being that one and being living.

The other one was that one and being that one was being any one being
living and winning intending some winning of continuing being one. That
one was having intending some continuing. She had that one and having
that one was one saying what she was saying about having that one, about
that one. And saying what she was saying about having that one, about
that one, she said all she said about having that one, about that one,
and saying all she said about having that one, about that one, she was
one conveying intending in not saying, in not feeling, in saying, in
needing all she was saying in feeling, in remembering in needing what
she could be saying in having that one, of that one.

She was needing being one living to be feeling what she was feeling in
having the one, in having the other one.

In feeling what she was feeling in having the one, and she had the one,
she was not compelling what she was saying in telling that if she was
living she was living. She had him and feeling what she was feeling she
was telling that she was not compelling being one being living, and
being living she could be feeling what she was feeling in having the one
who was that one one being one she had.

Like that very much like that and like that she did what beginning and
ending she was continuing not compelling saying in saying what she said
and feeling what she felt in feeling what if she were feeling she would
have to be living. She was feeling and coming in not continuing she was
in beginning and ending continuing and she was saying what she was
saying in feeling what she was feeling if she was feeling what to be
feeling she would have to be one being living. She was not compelling
saying, she was not compelling not continuing, she was beginning and
ending in continuing, she was saying what she was feeling and to be
feeling what she was feeling she was to be being living and being living
was not compelling living being continuing and she beginning and ending
was continuing and not compelling saying, and not compelling continuing.

She was continuing. She was saying in beginning and ending she was
continuing. She was continuing. She had one. In continuing she was
saying that anything, anything that was beginning and ending was like
continuing. She was saying that beginning and ending was not like
continuing she being living and having one and not compelling saying.
She was saying that not compelling continuing she being one and having
one and feeling what was like not continuing, she was not feeling like
compelling continuing, she was continuing if beginning and ending is
continuing and beginning and ending is and is not like continuing.

She had one and like that one, that one, and she was one, was one saying
what he was saying in feeling what he was feeling in feeling what to be
feeling was needing being one being living. That one, and she was one,
that one was having been saying what feeling was enlivening, feeling
beginning and ending and not compelling having been continuing.

She, and she had one he, she and he saying what they were saying, and
they were saying what they were saying were repeating what they were
feeling beginning and ending being continuing and it was continuing and
they were feeling and saying they were saying what was like what they
were saying. They were saying what was like what they were saying. She
had him, he was like what he was feeling, she was like what she was
feeling, he was saying what was like what he was saying, she was saying
what was like what she was saying, she was feeling, he was feeling.

She had one. He was one. They were feeling. They were saying. She was
feeling and was not compelling saying. She was saying and not compelling
feeling. He was saying and was not compelling feeling. He was feeling
and not compelling saying. He was feeling. He was saying. He was like
what he was. He was saying.

She had another one. Having another one she was like that one like one
having that other one. She had not been like that one like the one
having another one. She had that other one. She was saying. She was
saying and was not compelling feeling.

She went on being one and went on being the one being so like that one
that feeling, that saying, that being that one and being that one she
was saying, she was feeling, she was saying that she was not compelling
saying, she was feeling that she was not compelling feeling. She had
feeling vivid feeling she had feeling like that one. She had saying much
saying all saying like that one.

She had feeling vivid feeling. She had saying, much saying.

All, and very much is all. All is what very much is and very much that
is all is so decisively all that very much is so very much that it is
everything and everything being all and all being all how wonderfully
beautifully sweetly clearly all can be everything.

All is all. All being all and being all, always all that is all being
competely all if a little thing is a little thing and a little thing can
be a little thing a little thing is so decisively expressing all that
expressing is expressing that completely all is being all and always all
being all all is everything.

To begin what is not begun is not to begin everything. What is all is
deciding that having been expressed it is that and being that why should
not that have what it has and it certainly has what it has, it naturally
has what it has because it is what it is and it is everything and
everything is all. It is not begun and that is not puzzling in feeling.
It is not begun and that is not mentioned in loving. It is not begun and
that is completely expressed in telling. It is not begun and that is why
each one and there is only one is decisively adjusting all that is
interesting. One, how can that one not be that one when that one being
that one is that one. That one that very one, that one like that one is
not enough like that one so any one not that one can remember all of
that one. That one enough of that one is all compelling. That one all of
that one is all there can be of remembering. That one, that one and only
that one and quite that one and not translating, that one quite that one
and never translating, that one always that one and not having begun and
that one and that one who is that one, all, everything, why not certain
that only that one that that one. Being certain is not anything. Being
begun is not being begun. Being the one the decisively adjusting, the
completely not translating, the not having been begun one, being the
one, that one how that one how very that one is everything. All is
everything.

That is the way when that way is a way that is the way that way is the
way.

There can be some. There can be some quite often. There can be a great
many quite often. There can be very many very often.

There can be one who having lost her husband and having four children
and having a great deal of money and saving it for the children and
spending it for the children can not do what children can do, there can
be one who continuing living and looking as if she were being living is
being living and is continuing being living.

She is in a way not an old one being quite an old one and she is in a
way not an old one as she has had taken a photograph of herself her
daughter and her daughter's daughter and in the picture is also her
mother. There are four generations of them. She in a way being an old
one is not an old one and that is not startling not at all startling she
having four children and being rich and having lost her husband and
having been lonesome and having been saving for her children and having
been spending because she was feeling something of what she was being
feeling.

She had lost her husband. She knew that. She had four children. She knew
that of all four of them.

In meeting and she was always meeting what she was having in meeting she
said that what she asked she would have had, having what she had and she
could have all she had and she knew all she knew knowing all the
children she had and knowing that she had the four.

She did feel that she had given what she had given and that having given
all she had given in giving what she had given all was not what it might
have been if her children could have come to be what they came to be and
her husband had gone on living to die before she died so that she would
be living and not dying.

That was what was and she had grand-children. She had been being living
and being married and buying what she was buying and feeling in having
what she was having.

Being married and having children, having all four of them and there
were not any more of them, she was saying what she was saying in all of
them moving to where they were moving. Some one living with them was
knowing all all of them were knowing. Some one staying with them was
arranging not to be telling what any one of them was not telling. They
moved and having moved and having built what they built and having
feeling in being living as they had feeling in being living she was
having all she was having when she was giving what she was giving and
continuing buying what she was continuing buying in arranging what had
come to be an arranged thing.

She did do all of it and doing all of it she was married and having two
of her children coming to marrying if marrying was all of something.
Marrying was all of something and being married and the two children
came to marry, being married was not all of something. She did say all
she would say she had said.

Having what she was having and being married and there being four
children she was continuing buying what, that being arranged which was
arranged, she was buying. She was married. She was giving what she was
giving in there being all in the house that there was in the house. She
had what she was having.

She did say all she came to believe. She did come to believe all she did
say. The natural way of ending being dying she did not come to believe
that she would be feeling that dying was existing. In not believing
everything she was having all she could be needing.

She knew that ending being existing and dying being existing those who
were not dead were left and being left they felt what they felt and they
said what they said.

She said that she being left felt what she felt and said what she said.
She said that having what she had she knew what she knew and knowing
what she knew she gave what she gave and giving what she gave she was
not expecting what she was not expecting in continuing what she was
continuing and continuing what she was continuing she did have what she
could have in she being the one she was being and having the children
all four that she was having and having lost the husband the husband who
died and she had been a wife who was living.

In keeping what she was keeping she was not keeping all she was keeping
as she was giving something that she was giving. She was liking what she
was liking and saying what she was saying and asking everything she was
asking and supplying all she was supplying.

She said and did that which in needing all she could have she would say
and do. She repeated that in liking what she had been liking she had, in
giving what she had been giving, been having what she had. She was not
repeating in feeling. She was not repeating in dying. She was not
repeating in not dying. She was repeating in giving. She was repeating
in asking everything. She was repeating in being living.

In being living she was introducing something she was introducing what
she was asking. In introducing what she was asking she said what she
said. She said what she said and when she said what she said she left
what she left when she had what she had and she gave what she gave when
she left what she left.

She said that she did not leave anything and saying that she attended to
what she attended. Attending to what she was attending she said all she
said. She did not say that she felt anything that she was not asking.
She did not say that she liked more than she liked. She said that what
she saw was what was left when she gave what she gave. She said that she
said what she said. She said that she had said what she said. She said
what she saw and she saw what there was when she had what she had.

She was not the one who did come to have what she had. If she had come
to have what she had she would have lived when she lived and she would
ave died when she had had what she had had. She was not the one who was
all in having what she had and she did not have what she had having four
children and each of them being the one of the four of them that each
one was and her husband being succeeding and being living and she being
living so that he was dead before she was dying, she was not the one
having what she had. She was the one saying what she saw and she was
seeing what she had.

She was not leaving being that one in being one continuing and she did
not leave being that one because she was seeing what she had and she was
saying what she saw. She was not leaving being that one.

It could be that she was that one. It could quite be that she was that
one. It was that she was that one.

She said what she saw and she saw what she had and she said what she
said and she had what she had.

If she saw what she had and she said what she saw she had being living
and a husband and children and succeeding in not having been using in
feeling that she had not died and left her husband living with the four
who were being living and being living being existing. She did say that
she could be using all that she could say in saying what she saw and
seeing what she had. She did say that she could not be using what she
did say in seeing what she had. She did say that having what she had she
did not use what she would use if she saw what she had when she said
what she saw.

All that there is of what there is when there is what there is is that
which in the beginning and the middle and the ending is coming and going
and having and expecting. All that there is of what there is is that all
that is that. Four or five or six and there are six and there are five
and there are four and five and six all that there are are then all
there and being all there how can they not be there when they are there
and they are all there when they are there, when they are all there.
They are, they are there.

One and if not why not one and if one why not the one who is one. The
one who is one is there when she is there.

Thanking that one is not all of everything. Not thanking that one is not
all of everything. Thanking can be something.

If saying that thanking is existing is convincing then saying that
thanking is existing is saying that thanking is thanking. If all the
thanking is existing and if completing thanking is existing then
thanking is thanking. Thanking is enough.

All of that all of thanking is all of thanking and all of thanking and
thanking is thanking, all of thanking is thanking. That is quite
thanking.

If she was beautiful one day she was beautiful that day because she was
beautiful that day.

She was doing more than she intended and she liked it.

If she was beautiful one day she was beautiful that day because she was
beautiful that day. She was beautiful any day.

If she was beautiful every day she was beautiful because of the way that
she was beautiful that day. She did more than she intended and she liked
it.

To begin then. She was beautiful one day. She was beautiful that day
because she was beautiful that day. She was beautiful that day as that
day was the day that she was beautiful that day. She did more than she
intended and she liked it. She was beautiful that day.

She was beautiful that day and that day the day she was beautiful she
was beautiful and being beautiful that day because that day she was
beautiful she was beautiful on that day because she was beautiful that
day. She was beautiful that day.

She was beautiful one day. She was beautiful that day because being
beautiful that day she was beautiful that day. That day she was
beautiful.

All one day she was beautiful. She was beautiful that day. That day she
was beautiful and being beautiful that day that was the day that day was
the day that she was beautiful and so she was beautiful that day.

One day she was beautiful. She was beautiful that day.

A day being a day and a day being the day that she was being beautiful
because she was beautiful that day, a day being a day and she being
beautiful that day she was beautiful and being beautiful that day that
was the day she was beautiful, she being beautiful that day. A day was
that day the day that she being beautiful that day was beautiful that
day.

Why if a day was a day and she was beautiful that day why if a day is a
day and a day is a day and a day she is beautiful and she is beautiful a
day why if a day was a day and she was beautiful that day why is she
beautiful every day. If she is beautiful every day she is beautiful
every day. She is beautiful every day and each day she is beautiful she
is beautiful because that day she is beautiful and she is beautiful that
day because that day she is beautiful.

That is not a reason and that is not a day, any day is a day, she is
beautiful every day, there is not a day that there is not a reason that
she is beautiful that day and there being days and there being reasons
and she being beautiful every day every day is a day and she is
beautiful that day and she is beautiful the day she is beautiful because
she is beautiful that day. Any day is a day.

Having what in the beginning is all of ending is being what in being
living is existing. Any one, all of them, any one is what any one liking
any one not liking is liking is not liking, any one liking, any one not
liking is any one not liking, is any one liking.

Any one liking is intending is not intending. Any one not liking is
intending is not intending. Any one liking, any one not liking is not
intending, is intending.

Any one and any one, one and one and two, and one and one and one, and
one and many, and one and some, and one and any one, and any one and
any one, any one and any one is one and one is one and one is some one
and some one is some one, any one and one and one and one, any one is
that one and that one is that one and any one and one, and one and one,
any one is the one and the one who is the one is that one. The one who
is the one who is that one, any one and any one is one, one is one, one
is that one, and any one, any one is one and one is one, and one and
one, and one and one and one and one.




G.M.P.




He did not and all of them did not and any of them would see that a
color which was quite attractive could be a color that is very
attractive and some of them if they liked it would do it again would see
the color again that they had seen and one of them doing very well what
he was doing was not killed and he was hurt enough so that he did not
walk when he was carried.

A thing that is very well done and would be pleasing to some is done by
one who doing what that one is doing is giving what that one is giving
and that one giving what that one is giving is selecting what would be
young if the parts that can be seen were not parts that were old when a
part that is not old is young and might not be young if all the parts
were young and should not be young if some one who is not pleased is not
pleased. Quite likely every one who is not pleased can be pleased when
what has been selected has been selected to be old and to be young.
Certainly enough pleasing is affecting what is selected to be old and to
be young. Pleasing and not entirely pleasing is when all that is blue is
green blue and not a color that is different from green and blue. A
pleasant thing is what being selected is not selected when something is
old and when something is young, a pleasant thing is not a pleasant
thing when something has been selected which is not what that one
selecting did not like.

All of it, all of selecting, all of a pleasant thing is what has been a
bigger thing than a piece of it taken away from it and not forgotten. A
pleasant thing and some one selecting is selecting something, a pleasant
thing and many of them can be found when everything is found that is
pleasant and when everything that is selected is selected again.

It is a grief to almost any one that all that is being done and has been
done is what has been done and is being done. It is a grief to almost
any one to see every one, to meet every one, to forget every one, to
tell some everything is something. It is a happiness that what is is
being done and has been done and will be done. It is exciting to every
one that what has been done has been done and what is being done is
being done. It is a reflection to any one that what has been done has
been done and what is done is being done. It is a determination in every
one that everything is done that is done and that everything has been
done that has been done. It is annoying to every one that everything
that has been done has been done and everything that is done is done. It
is a regret to every one that everything that is done is done and that
everything that has been done has been done.

If all who were coming were going and coming it would be certain that
all had commenced something. All who commence something are the ones
that have all that they have when they have, when they have had all that
they have, and all who are coming are coming and going. It is enough
when all are going who are coming and going, it is enough that when all
are coming they are all coming.

He who says he has come and is going is the one who has come and is
going. He says that he is going because he has been coming. He says that
he has been coming. He says that all who are coming are coming and all
of them will be going and all of them are going. He says that he has
begun not to go. He says that he can begin to come and begin to go. He
says that he came very slowly and is going gradually and that he is not
coming, he says he is going, he says that he has just been told all that
he was not told when he was told that he was coming in the way that he
was coming and would be going in any way that he would be going. He says
that he has heard all that he can hear and that he will hear all that he
is going to hear and he says that there is a way to come and a way to
hear what he will hear. He is not going. He says he is going. He is not
coming. He says he is coming. He has come and he has gone. Hopefully he
knows all he hears. Desperately he hears what he knows. Quietly he
repeats what he will hear. He never asks whether he is going or coming.
He always hears that he is coming, he always hears that he is going. He
once heard that he had had what he had and he had what he had and he
would have what he had and that he might have what he did have and he
said that that was what he was hearing when he heard what was said and
he knew what he had and he said that he heard what he heard and that he
was coming and he said he knew he had been going. He heard all who spoke
when he was hearing all he knew. This is Walter.

If he were happy there he would be happier there than any where. If he
were succeeding there he would be certain to be recognised as having
done more than he would have done if he had not succeeded there. He
learnt what he learnt and he lost what he lost when he knew that he had
come to know that he was seeing and had been seeing what he had been
learning.

If in walking and in coming late and hurrying and going then to send
something and being then taking what he was having and being politely
mentioning that being polite is something and not everything, if in
saying that evidently what he was saying was what evidently was what he
was saying, if in having been suffering and having been creating and
having been explaining and having been selling and having been buying,
if in having been using and having been creating and having been
evidently destroying and having been evidently understanding, if in
having been seeing and having been talking and having been staying and
having been needing all he was needing, if in having been creating and
having been suffering and having been hurrying and having been
expecting, if in having been creating and not having been destroying and
having been succeeding and not having been disappointing one, some are
understanding when all are agreeing, is expressing that going on is
changing and he is going on and all are remembering that going on and
changing is going on. He is expressing and he is expressing, he is
expressing.

If telling each one that thing is telling each one everything, and
telling each one everything is telling each one something, if telling
each one something is discovering that thing then creating anything is
expressing that thing.

Fortune and succeeding and coming again often is all of something and
that thing is creating repeating, and creating something is gaining
recognition, and gaining something is expecting some one, and expecting
some one is pleasing one who is succeeding.

If in beginning each one is disturbing and if in disturbing each one is
arranging and if in arranging each one is attending and if in attending
each one is admiring and if in admiring each one is advising and if in
advising each one is urging and if in urging each one is helping and if
in helping each one is progressing and if in progressing each one is
intending and if in intending each one is desiring and if in desiring
each one is expecting and if in expecting each one is discussing then
all of them will be denying and all of them will be remembering what had
been happening and all of them will have meaning in creating being
existing.

Larger than everything is larger. Larger and larger and not so strange,
larger and strange and stranger, these are coming and have come and
they are not going. Large and strange, and large and large, and strange
and stranger, and strange and large, and strange, and large, and strange
and stranger, and large and larger, these are what has come and is
coming and is staying and is meaning that anything is pleasant and that
anything is unpleasant. That is enough. Always having done what is not
making all the difference between what has been done and is being done
is what has been done and what has not been done. What has been done is
what is making the difference that is meaning what it is meaning if it
were making all the difference that what has been done has not been
making.

In being each one moving a little in holding up and dropping what was
not resting each one is being that one who has shown what he will do in
doing what he has done to be not the one who is watching while waiting.
Each one is not watching while waiting. Any one coming to move a little
and deranging what he is holding is not needing to be distracting any
attention which is then not existing. So it can have been when all of
them were not then doing all that was known. All that could be known was
what all of them said they knew and they did know what they knew and
they said all that they could say in saying all that they did say. They
were not then all who were including all of enough and they were all
then including everything and they were all then not deciding that any
one who was coming was not coming. The one stopped motioning the one who
was not motioning, the one stopped motioning, the one who was motioning,
the one stopped motioning the one who would be, was and had been
motioning, the one motioned and stopped motioning, the one had motioned
and was motioning, the one stopped motioning and was and would be
motioning.

Meeting they went all of them with the one with whom they went and they
stayed and were talking, they stayed and all who stayed and were talking
and those who stayed and were not talking they all stayed when they
stayed.

They respected when they stayed all they said and they stayed and they
said all they said. They said that they respected what they said while
they stayed and they stayed. They stayed and they said what they
respected and what they said.

They did not stay to stay they stayed and they said they respected what
they said. They did what they said they respected and they said they
respected what they respected. That was not enough and they said it was
enough and that it was not enough. They said they stayed and they said
that they respected all they respected and they respected all they said.

They stayed when they stayed. They all stayed when they stayed. They all
respected what they said when they said what they said. They all said
what they said. They all stayed.

In coming they said that they had not chosen. They were not choosing in
coming and in staying, they were knowing what they were saying.

He who was not saying that he was coming was leading when he was staying
and he was staying when he was saying all he was knowing.

They were staying. One was staying and had been coming and was coming
and was staying. He was saying what he was saying and he was knowing
that he was saying all he was saying.

They were staying when they were staying and they were coming when they
were coming. They were going when they were going. They were coming and
staying. They were going.

He who was saying what he was saying and was going while he was going
was staying and while he was staying he was saying what he was knowing.
He was saying all he was knowing he was saying. He was staying.

They were staying. They were dividing all their staying with saying all
they were saying. They were all staying. They were dividing all their
staying with saying what they were knowing. They were dividing all their
staying with explaining what they were saying. They were all staying.
They were all saying that they were knowing what they were saying.

They were intending to be staying, they were staying. They were
intending dividing being staying with saying what they were knowing they
were saying. They were dividing being staying with saying what they were
knowing they were saying.

They were staying. They were expressing being staying. They were
expressing saying what they were knowing they were saying. They were
expressing intending to be saying what they were knowing they were
saying.

He was one saying what he was saying and intending to be saying what he
was knowing he was saying. He was one intending to be staying. He was
one dividing being staying with saying what he was saying. He was one
intending to be saying what he was knowing he was saying. He was one
expressing being saying what he was knowing he was saying.

They were particularly accepting staying. They were dividing staying
with continuing choosing. They were contemplating intelligent
developing. They were arranging determining allowing feeling. They were
staying. They were saying what they were saying. They were particularly
accepting staying.

In particularly accepting staying they were not organising dividing
staying with saying what they were knowing they were saying. They were
not organising staying. They were staying.

He was who a tall enough one to be a young enough one was one who was
staying when he had come and was come and was not staying and not
staying did not leave what he had when he had stayed where he had
stayed. He did not stay in saying what he said as he said what he knew
he would say and he said that staying was a thing he was dividing and
dividing it he was particularly accepting what he was saying. He was
leading in being this one and he was accepting then coming to be the one
to be leading himself to all of everything of this thing.

He was the one and so he did the thing he did something of particularly
accepting staying. He was the one doing something of everything of this
thing.

In staying together in staying all who were staying were not all staying
and all who were staying were all staying and all staying staying was
occupying dividing saying what they were knowing they were saying with
doing what they were doing in staying as they were staying in staying
where they had been staying. In staying they were staying and staying
they were dividing doing what they were doing and saying what they were
saying with staying all of when they were staying and all were staying
in the way they were staying when they were staying while they were
staying.

He who in staying was dividing all of staying in saying that he was
knowing he was saying in staying all he was staying, he who in staying
was dividing all of his staying in going on in staying and in saying all
he was saying in knowing he was saying what he was saying in staying all
he was staying, he who was staying and dividing all his staying was
staying and staying he came to be staying in staying where he would be
staying when he had stayed all the staying he would be staying in being,
in having been, in going to be and not going on in being staying. He did
all this and he was the one who could and did do all this. He was the
one who had done this and he was the one who could do this which he
would have done and he did do what he could have done if he had done all
the staying he did.

In staying he who in staying was not leading as he was the one telling
what he had been staying in when he was staying, he who in staying was
not leading was the one who in staying stayed and staying stayed the way
staying was staying in his staying and he was the one who said that he
said what was not said as he had not said what he had not said and he
did not say anything then, he divided what he divided when he was not
dividing staying and he stayed.

He who was one and all and all were then, he and he was one and all who
were some were then, he and all and he and some, they were all and he
was one and all and all were then and he was one, and all and he and all
were and he was one, and all were who were and all were, and he was one
and he and all, and all were. They were and were not the one who was all
that was what it was. He was one and was not all that was what it was.
He was one. He and all and he was one.

One was staying and staying was not staying as staying is staying and he
staying was one and had been all being staying of his being staying. He
having staying was staying, he being staying of his being staying
staying. He being staying, he having staying was being staying and
staying he had all he had when he had what he having staying was not
having in measuring what he was preparing and he staying, having being
staying. He was all that and staying and he was not remaining and in
remaining he was not dividing staying with remaining, and dividing
staying with remaining he was not retaining dividing staying with
leaving, and not dividing staying with leaving he was having having been
completely measuring arranging and he was having having divided all of
staying with all of remaining. He was dividing all of remaining with
having been had having and he was had and he was dividing all of staying
with being had and taking all of dividing remaining with staying with
having been had in taking being had. He had dividing staying and not
dividing anything of all of remaining, and he had dividing all of
staying with having had something of all of having been had in being
had.

Enough is what all had who did not have enough and all and some and all
who were and some who were and all were and they all were dividing
coming and meaning, and speaking and meeting and they all were dividing
staying and working and all and some and one and all and some and all
and all were dividing staying and speaking and working and advancing and
losing and opening and selling. All were dividing coming and hearing and
taking and going and agreeing and staying. All were dividing and one,
and all were dividing, and one was dividing, and all were dividing, and
all and one, and all and some, and some and some, and one, and one and
some, and one were dividing staying with selling, and staying with
changing, and staying with staying, and staying with telling what they
were speaking, and staying with following, and staying with protesting,
and staying with agreeing, and staying with staying.

He turned away and said that he had come to stay. He had come to stay.
He turned away and said that he had come and was saying what he knew he
was saying. He was not saying that he knew what he was feeling. He was
not saying that he knew what he was doing. He turned away and he said he
had come to stay and he did stay and stay and he did say all he did say.
In staying he was not losing what he was having. In staying he was
walking and walking that which was rattling was rattling and that which
was rattling was not rattling any more than it would be rattling if any
one were walking where he was walking and he was walking and he was
staying and he turned away and said he was staying and he did stay and
staying he was saying what he said he was saying.

While he would come to have the one who had made a pipe for him make
another pipe for him and then another, while he who would come to have
the pipe he would have when he had had all the places he wanted to have
to have the pipes come to that would come, while he was staying and he
was staying, he was saying that he was saying all he was saying, while
he was staying and he was staying he was having what he said he knew he
could not destroy if he destroyed anything, while he was staying and he
was staying, while he was staying he was going and to each one he was
going and going he was to each one saying what he was meaning when he
had what he did not destroy when he destroyed anything. He did feed all
he fed, he did feel all he ate, he did eat all he had, he did have all
he ate, he did eat all he gave, he did give all he ate, he did give what
he ate, he did eat what he ate.

He who was alone when he was alone was not alone because he was not
alone. He was not alone because not being alone he was not alone.

He would not have refused anything that he was giving. He came to every
one and telling each one he told every one what he told and he told all
he told, he was telling each one what he was telling every one as each
one being each one every one was every one.

He was not one who was just telling each one what he told each one, and
every one what he told every one. He was one and he did not refuse all
he gave. He was one and some who were staying and knowing completely
knowing he was staying were what they were when they were all they were,
and they were all they were when they were what they were when they
were. They were all there and all of them being there and he being there
and he and all of them being all of them, they did do that thing, they
did do what they said they said as they said they knew what they said.

They were all staying if they were all having all they were all having
and they were all coming to be staying when they were all not coming to
be having what they were all having. They were all not staying. They did
stay. He did stay and staying he would be alone when he was not staying
and he was not alone as he was not staying. He was not alone.

Five of the different kinds one is and being had every day is not being
had too often if all staying are saying all they are knowing they are
saying. If all staying are saying all they are knowing they are saying
and five of the different kinds one is is had every day then it is
enough if one is asking if three of the different kinds one is should
not be changing to two different kinds that that one is, if one is
asking it is enough if all are asking and all staying are saying all of
what they are knowing they are saying.

Five of the different kinds one is and some of the kinds one is coming
to be all the different kinds one is then all who are staying are saying
all they are saying when they they are knowing that all are saying all
they are knowing they are saying.

He said that he heard that he said that he was not staying and he said
he was not staying as he was the one not intending leaving staying. He
was not then all of not staying. He was then giving all of not staying
and giving all of not staying he had a certificate that he was not
staying and he would be staying when he said that he said what he knew
he said and he had said, he had been saying all of saying that he knew
he said that he knew he said what he said and he said what he knew he
said.

In pleasing and he did say what he said he knew he said, in pleasing he
was staying where he said he had been staying when he had come to be
leaving. In pleasing he was reciting what staying had been when he could
have been leaving. In staying he was saying that he knew that he was
saying what he was saying.

Sitting together and if there was room for six there was room for ten,
sitting together they could follow two and they did follow one. Sitting
together they said what they said when they saw what they had seen.

They did not sit together when they were saying what they knew they were
saying, they were staying and beginning that it had come to pass that
all who were leaving had been staying.

If walking fast tired one, listening tired one. If talking tired one,
not talking tired one. If staying tired one, leaving did not tire one.
If saying that he knew what he was saying tired one, talking did not
tire one.

If hurrying was what not any one of them was doing, waiting was not what
any one of them was doing. If persisting was what one of them was doing,
hesitating was what that one was doing.

They did not declare that they were there and they were not there when
they declared that they were staying where they were going. It was not
all of the urging that had come out of anything that decided everything.
It was not the troubling every one that hurt every one. It was not the
following one that meant that they followed something. There was room
for ten when there was room for six. Sixty came and they stayed when
they stayed. And two would not believe that they had stayed all they had
stayed. There was room for ten when there was room for six.

They were all staying and they did not stay because they had stayed to
stay. They had not stayed to stay. They had come to stay.

In staying they were not following one, they were following all who
stayed, and following all who stayed they did not follow as they all
stayed.

They did all stay and staying they did with feeling that they were
saying what they knew they were saying.

They did begin one and one and all of them to stay. They did stay. They
were saying, one was saying, they were saying, each was saying, all were
saying that which they said they knew they were saying.

They did all of them come to staying. They did all of them come to
following each one. They did all of them come to say that they had been
saying what they knew they were saying.

If they had any of them refused all they could refuse they would have
been all of them important as they were. They were saying what they knew
they were saying. They were refusing all they were refusing.

They did not see all who were staying to say what they knew they were
saying. They did hear very much of all they heard. They were enlightened
when they said they were staying and that they were saying what they
knew they were saying.

They had enough to be attacking confusion, they had enough of staying.
They had enough of staying in accomplishing to be aspiring in saying
what they were knowing they were saying.

Addressing themselves then they were saying what they were saying.
Allowing themselves then they were saying what they were saying.
Intending then they were saying what they were saying. Following then
they were saying what they were saying. Leading then they were saying
what they were saying. Having been staying they were coming in saying
what they were saying. Expecting then they were deciding destroying and
knowing what they where saying. Working then they were producing saying
what they were knowing they were saying.

It was not a fantasy this which was an open movement of staying. It was
not a desertion this which was a complete staying in recognising. It was
not completely enterprising that which was creating following. It was
not determining that which was intending some destroying. It was
completely enlivening this which was contrasting what was remaining. It
was completely intending that which was opening alarming. It was
completely meaning that which was beginning explaining understanding. It
was vaguely attacking that which was distinctly clearing. It was
deciding believing that which was expecting demonstrating.

They all were where any one who was not there was and they all were
where they would be when they were where they had come when they had
stayed as they had stayed, because they had stayed and staying and
saying that which they were knowing they were completely what if
emerging is accepting constraining is not destroying and intending is
continuing.

In having meaning, in expecting realisation, in deserting wearying, in
exhausting attending, in loving insisting, in embarking anything, in
continuing meaning, in persisting working, in hoping having been
realising, in urging continuous hoping, in longing for existing, in
hearing encouraging, in desolating what is waiting, in returning what
has been being the ridiculous part of everything, in remembering all of
conquering that has meaning, in straining all of selling that has
buying, in operating all the desolation that has repeating, in all that
is and was these who were and came were the ones who are when they stay
and do not remain where they will be, these were the ones who are when
they are and they are when they are as they had when they had what they
had because they did not have what they could have since they did not
have all they did have as they were when they are.

In staying and not waiting in choosing and progressing, in following and
destroying, in succeeding and denying, in aspiring and varying in
remaining and not saddening, in looking often, in expecting everything,
in remaining after leaving choosing some, in selling after succeeding,
in expecting to be selling after succeeding, in not denying selling
after succeeding, in saying that saying can be saying, in arranging to
be seeing what has been being seen when it has been seen, in returning
when changing, in not going back in returning, in succeeding when they
were remaining, in remaining when they had been succeeding, in remaining
when they were not going to be succeeding, they were living. They were
living. There had been room for ten when there had been room for six.
There was room for six when there was room for ten. They were living.

They said that they knew that to be living was to be living. They said
that they knew that if there was room for ten there was room for ten.
They said there was room for ten. They said if there was room for ten
there was room for six. They said there was room for ten. They said if
there was room for ten there was room for six. They said there was room.
They said there was room for ten. They said there was room for ten and
they said if there was room for six there was room for ten.

They prepared something. They did not prepare saying they were knowing
what they were saying. They were knowing they were saying what they were
saying. They were staying. They were preparing what they would be doing
as they were staying where they were staying. They were not preparing
staying.

He did say what he did say and that was to say that many kept away there
where they said what they knew they said when they stayed as they
stayed. He did not say that they stayed away. He did not say that
staying they were saying that they were knowing that they were saying
that they were staying. He did say that staying they were saying that
they were knowing what they were saying, he did say that they were
staying. He did not say that he was staying when he was saying that he
was knowing what he was saying. He did not say that he was saying what
he was knowing what he was saying. He was saying that he was knowing
that he was saying what he was saying and he did say that he was knowing
he was staying. He did not say that he would be staying. He did not say
that he would be knowing that he was saying what he was saying. He did
say that if he would be staying he would be knowing he was saying what
he was saying. He did say that he would be saying what he would be
saying and he would be staying when he would be staying. He did say he
would be staying.

They were all there was of the ones they all were and this was not
because they were moving in unison, this was not because they were
regular in working, this was not because they were defending what they
were leading, this was not because they were holding what they were
having, this was not because they were not succeeding, this was not
because they were not realising all that was breathing, this was not
because they were acting as they were intending, this was not because
they were feeling in being needing, this was not because wonderfully
exciting was being progressing, this was not because they were placing
what they were inspecting, this was not because they were not urging
what they were using, this was because they were following where they
were leading.

If expecting nothing is not disconcerting expecting something is not
annoying. He who had what was refused sold what he had given. He did not
sell it again. He sold it once and that was satisfying. He felt it all
all there was of selling. He knew he felt it all all there was of
selling. He knew that he was having refused again what he had the
obligation of having being existing. He felt all there was of having
being knowing what he was intending would be satisfying when the
obligation of selling would be completing selling what he had been
creating.

He did not live then and he was then the one living who was saying what
he was saying, saying he was knowing what he was saying, saying that all
who were leading and staying were saying that he was saying what he was
knowing he was saying.

He did use the complete way of showing leading being staying and staying
being saying what was knowing being saying.

If seeing all and feeling all, if seeing all and feeling all and
producing all and explaining all and attending all and demonstrating
all, if seeing all and feeling all, if producing all and explaining all
and demonstrating all and attending all, if producing all and explaining
all and feeling all and seeing all and attending all, if seeing all and
producing all and explaining all is the condition of any one being like
many men then he who was the one who was that one was undoubtedly that
one and is undoubtedly this one and this one had done that which as
accumulating and explaining and existing is persisting.

He and continuing, prospering and assorting, varying and meaning, hoping
and enlarging, tolerating and turning, he and producing, he and seeing,
he and feeling, he and continuing, he and some of them were not then
what he had when he had what he had.

If making again and again the complete tinkling that moving anything is
producing is annoying it can be that it is a heavy horrid thing the
thing that is produced by some one, it can be that it is a thickening
dull thing, a visibly weakening thing, a prettily cherished thing, a
large awkward thing, a large dreary thing, a large boisterous thing, a
large thing, a small thing, a tiny thing, an agreeable thing. One making
something is making a vigorous brilliant completed ragged covered thing.
One making something is making a completed, heavy, brilliant, vigorous,
startling, adjoining thing.

He came to be the one who was the one who could say what he did say when
he said that he had done all he had done. There were enough who had what
they had so that they all said that they had done what they had done.

They were what they were as they said that they were and they were doing
what they were doing as they said they were doing what they were doing.

If it is a willing thing to be fairly active in determining that leaving
leaning forward means marrying, if it is a happy thing that exhibiting
means coming to be withdrawing what one was expecting to have had
remaining, if it is a lonely thing to be telling some one who is one who
has come to be one that they are waiting and certainly not any one had
been so completely despairing as some one is worrying, if it is a lovely
thing to have what is remaining lasting so that leaving it is not
destroying loving being something, if it is succeeding to be discovering
that having been is losing coming to be, if it is an aspiring thing to
be marrying when a little thing is a big thing and a big thing is
selling for what it is selling, if it is a steady thing that all that
has been is following when all that has been has been completing
arranging being and not being deceiving, if all that can be worried is
lost and all that can be gained can be won and all that remained can be
shown and all that is sold can be seen, if seizing is not doing and
doing is progressing and progressing is denying and denying is
constructing and constructing is explaining and explaining is unifying
and unifying is repeating and repeating is creating, if creating is not
exhausting and if not exhausting is allowing saying what is saying when
talking is enlarging what enlarging is meaning when meaning has
expression, if expression has emotion and emotion has a medium and a
medium is adaptation and adaptation is not being used when anything is
coming then all who had the room that they had when they were what they
were saying was what saying is if it is producing and it is producing,
all had the room where they put what they put as they made what they
made and felt what they felt and followed what they led and led where
they went.

Late in looking like a young man, long in looking like a young man,
young in being quite a young man, last in beginning continuing being a
young man he who was clearly using all he was using was feeling enough
of having what he was having to be feeling all he was feeling in
suffering all he was suffering and producing what he was producing. In
producing what he was producing he was not spending what he was paying
in buying what he was buying. He bought something and he used something
and he had something and he produced something and he sold what he sold
and that which was selling was not being deceiving because he was
producing what he was producing and having what he was having.

It is not likely that exchanging producing for buying and buying for
selling and selling for worrying and worrying for succeeding and
succeeding for marrying and marrying for having children and having
children for directing and directing for explaining and explaining for
complaining and complaining for winning and winning for receiving and
receiving for anticipating and anticipating for remaining, it is not
likely that being for being and producing for explaining and suffering
for producing and winning for suffering and continuing for winning and
spending for continuing can be meaning that largely continuing is not
needing producing and needing producing is not achieving existing and
achieving existing is expressing explaining and expressing explaining is
convincing realising and convincing realising is active repetition and
active repetition is expressing complete being and expressing complete
being is undertaking disagreeing and undertaking disagreeing is winning
harmonising and winning harmonising is showing objection and showing
objection is fulfilling producing and fulfilling producing is
understanding creation and undertaking creation is destroying filling
and destroying filling is arranging existing and arranging existing is
demonstrating anything and demonstrating anything is fulfilling
something and fulfilling something is emptying filling and emptying
filling is creating action and creating action is suggesting realisation
and suggesting realisation is expecting working and expecting working is
attending continuing.

Everything that came went and every one who went came and they all and
there were six when there were two and there were five when there were
ten and there were thirty six when they were twelve and there were
fifty-six when there were eighty and there were three when there
nineteen and there was one when there were ten and there were two when
there were three and they all came and went and they all went and they
all came and they all came and went and they all came and they all went
and they all came and they came and they came and they went and came and
they came and went and they came. They came and they all they all
stayed and left.

When any one is every way and every one is every way when any one is
every way they are all working and they are not working together when
each one is working.

They are working and all working they have hanging what they put where
they put it where it is. And they can easily have them together they
being where they are and they can publish it in a report they writing
what is written and leading where they are following, and leading where
they are leading, and leading.

It is a robust decision that would be made by a robust man not suffering
and a robust man is suffering if he has a little child who is a little
girl and living. He can then keep what he has and take what he gives and
place what he receives and marry what he will have. He can then tell
what he explains and he can then ask that he hears what will be said.

He was not astonishing, he was not despairing, he was leading.

The way he came not to laugh was by continuing to talk and talking was
not what he was doing and he was doing what he was doing. If they were
there and they were there if they were there they were not destroying
what he was not destroying.

There were eight who were not laughing. There were eight and he was not
laughing. There were eight who were not laughing.

There were four who were not laughing. He was not laughing. They were
talking. He was talking. They were producing. He was producing. They
were intending. He was intending.

He was producing and he was not laughing and he was talking and he was
asking that he could have the whole list that he had made mean
something. The whole list he had made meant something. It meant all of
something. He did not disoblige all when he did all he did and he was
all he was and he did all he did and he was talking and he was producing
and he meant all of something.

They did not call each other and they did not say a man, a man. They did
not call each other. They did say that there was a man and there would
be men and they would not be calling.

They meant that they said that there would not be calling. They meant
that they said what they knew and they said what they knew they said.

They said that not calling was different from calling in a way and they
said that there were men and they said there was a man and they said
that they would be the men they would be and there would not be
calling. If there was the following and leading, if there had been
calling, if there was not calling, if there would be what there would be
they were all what they were and though they said there was a man they
said that there was not any calling. They said there was not any
calling, they said they were saying what they knew they were saying.

They were not continuing intending, they were continuing saying that
calling is calling, they were continuing proposing saying they were
saying what they were knowing they were saying.

He was one and he did not stumble when he heard that calling is calling.
He did not deny that saying a man is having calling is saying a man is
having calling. He did not deny that calling is calling. He did not hear
that any one calling and saying what they were saying were saying that
calling is calling.

He did not hesitate and he was there and he was not calling and he was
saying that not calling is not calling. He was not saying that he knew
he was saying what he knew he was saying. He was saying that not calling
is not calling. He was saying that he knew he was saying what he was
saying. He was saying that not calling is not calling. He was saying
that calling and saying a man is not calling is not saying that not
calling is not calling.

They always thought that they did not fail all of any of them and they
did not and they were there where if they were they were. It was the way
to be that which they did not do and they said it, they did say it, and
they did not declare it and they could not hear all that was said
although they did hear often that all that was said was said.

If showing what is done is one thing, and doing what is shown is one
thing, and saying what is said is one thing, and hearing what is heard
is one thing, then to be some one must find out in some way that they
are the one who are the one to do what is shown, to show what is done,
to hear what is heard, to say what is said. The way to find out that the
one showing is showing, the way to find out that one is that one is to
be that one. The way to find out that the one doing what is showing is
doing what is showing is to be the one doing what is showing. The way to
find out that the one hearing what is heard is the one hearing what is
heard is to be the one hearing what is heard. The way to find out that
the one saying what is said is the one saying what is said is to be that
one the one saying what is said.

Not gathered together is a way of sitting. It is not the only way of
sitting.

He was not gathered together. He was sitting and when he was sitting he
could say that he did say that any day was a day. He did say that that
day was a day that he had been sitting. He did not say that not gathered
together was a way of sitting. He did not say that there was a way of
sitting.

He accomplished it all. He accomplished not being gathered together is a
way of sitting. He accomplished all and he said that that day was a day
and he said that he did not sit and not sitting he did not sit not
gathered together. He said that if he sat not gathered together he told
what he knew he had had that day as he had sat that day and he did not
say that he sat not gathered together, he did not say that he did not
sit that day, he did say that he had sat that day.

He was the one who was that one who was one who said that sitting was
where he sat, and he did not sit gathered together. He did not say that
sitting he sat, he did say that sitting is sitting, he did say that he
sat, he did say that hearing what he had not seen saying was not
tormenting.

He did receive when he received and he did sit not gathered together
when he sat and was not gathered together and he sat and he said that
sitting all of sitting, all of sitting not gathered together was
sitting, and he said that he saw all of sitting and he said he sat and
he said that the sitting he sat he sat when he was sitting and he said
he had been sitting and he said that he was sitting and he said he sat.
He did say that he sat.

It was not a desperate disturbance that he returned when he sat not
gathered together. He did not sit not gathered together. He emerged and
he did not say that he did not sit. He did say that he did sit. He said
that any day he sat was a day he sat. He said he sat any day. He said he
sat.

He accomplished it all. He did that. In all that was what sitting is not
he was all that was that was when he was and he was sitting not gathered
together.

He did not see. When he did see he explained that seeing he was sitting
and sitting he was gathered together. He accomplished it all.

He did accomplish it all and in all of it he was the one who sitting was
having it said that he sitting was gathered together and that he was not
sitting. He did say that that which was said was what was said. He did
not complete saying he was sitting not gathered together, he was sitting
gathered together.

He looked there where looking is seeing. He looked there. Always he did
not know that doing so he was the one who was the one sitting and
sitting not gathered together, sitting gathered together, sitting. He
did know that he was sitting. He did know. He did know he was sitting
gathered together. He did know. If he was one who was to be one he was
one who being one is accomplishing it all. And this is not everything,
this is not what it is when it is what it is. Very likely there are all
there who are there when not any one is there. Very likely they are
there. Very likely and he who saw when he saw where he looked was there
and he was there when he was not there, and very likely he was there.

It all is not enough. And always it is all. It is all. That is not what
it is. That is what it is. It is all. That is enough and he can say it
and say that it is not enough. He can say that all is all. He can say
it. He says all is all. He says it. He says that all is all and he says
it and there is what is said. It is really all and it is not said that
all is all. If it is said that all is all it is said that it is said.

There could be if there is the remarkable expression that allowing
something and asking repetition and regaining elevation and continuing
sounding is the creation of a nation if all of them are being living.
They are being living in remaining accumulating and they are remaining
accumulating as they are reserving what they are sparing and they are
sparing what in buying and selling is not remaining. All who are not one
are all enough to see that they have where they have what they have.
They are not all one. One is one. They are all the one where there is
one that is one.

White and color and also other things are not retracting what they are
going to be doing. Smaller and large, big and little, active and acting
are not intending to be denying what they are saying. Accumulating is
not ceasing to be meaning increasing. Expressing is not emerging and
destroying. Agreeing is agreeing. Convincing is selling. Increasing is
oddly what it is.

Increasing and selling, having and reiterating is where it is and it is
there and it is moving.

Completely the having come to walk may be the way of staying. He came
and it was told to him that he would be pounding. He did not do that. He
did what he did and he copied somethings and some who saw him said to
him that he did that then. He said to them that he was doing what he was
doing. He said to them that he asked any one if he was to be the one he
was to be. He said that he was asking to be continuing.

He did not have it there where he came to stay he did not have it there
to be the one who had been one who had come there to be pounding. He was
continuing. He undertook all of undertaking continuing all except that
which was undertaken by some one giving him what they should have given
him. He was continuing.

It is very likely that a way to be in play is to say that a beard which
is in the mouth is not eaten. That is a way to play and he who in a
complete expression was keeping what he had begotten did come to ask
that in working he should be receving what working could be done to keep
him. He was active and this was not oppressive as three times was many
times all winter and every winter and every summer and all summer. He
was there and everywhere all the rectification was that a recital would
be written. It was not written that is to say a writing that came was
not coming and the time that was was there and anyway a beginning that
was not determining as to beginning being exciting was determining as to
a recital having the meaning that a recital being existing is completely
the recital that is the recital that was there when there came to be
there there where he came to have there what he had. Certainly the end
was removing, certainly he was not deliberating and the reason that
likelihood was not compelling was that he being there and there being
where he being there, there had been and would be there. It was not a
day and not a night, and it was not talking and keeping still that
determined anything, it was that there was there and he had been and
would be there. And he was not everywhere and he was there where any one
could be certain that any one not hearing him would be seeing him and
seeing and hearing him would be remaining and exposing and allowing what
they did not undertake and he did not begin to hear.

Likely very likely yes, likely very likely no, likely, very likely he
said they were the men who called each other everything. And this one
was the one who came and he said that they were then the men who called
each other everything. This was demonstrating that appearances are not
deceiving. He was the one who said that the one who was the one who was
one they were callling each other everything was the one who was leading
and following and they were all leading and following. He was the one
dwelling on enthusiasm and calling every one something and calling some
something and calling everything. He was not destroying anticipation. He
was dwelling on reaction. He was not discounting reverberation. He was
all there was when a district was not under construction. He did
orginate feeling enjoying enthusiasm in calling all of them everything.
This was one who was a crowd when all of them were together.

If he came to say that he had a headache it was because he had always
had something that did not stop him from coming to have his head aching
when he was not seeing that he was resting. He did not need resting. He
did not need headache. He did need to have what he had and he had what
he had and when he showed what he had he said all he said. He was ready
to repeat the name he used when he used a name and he did use a name and
repeat the same and he was ready to come when he came and he was ready
to feel what he felt and he said what he said. He did not decline all
reverberation. He did authenticate living in a house and having enough
children. He did actualise knowing where some things could be hanging.
He was not receiving what would be coming. He would not articulate that
he had not refused an opinion. He did not affirm that he went
everywhere. He did tell all he had known of experiencing something.

To see and have a beard, to see and shave it, to see and seeing see that
the light that is shining and showing a beard which is growing is the
light that has been showing a beard that was a beard and has been a
beard that has been shaved as shaving is shaving, to see and have the
color stay where color stays, to see and have the water lie where water
lies, to see and have the trees have leaves the way the trees have
leaves, to see and be the one who has the work that makes the way that
has the form that shows the land that is the grass and holds the weight
that is the light and is the last that is the same as it is when it is
where it is that every one encouraging themselves are denying and are
not remaining to be sharing. It is that it is all there is to forget
when all that is is what came to be by seeing where feeling having grass
which is not shining is not denying anything, and denying anything is
not returning and is returning often. This can not demonstrate that the
white that is not remaining is not changing. This can demonstrate enough
to keep all pushing and continuing to go on expressing anything. This
does not make what it is when all is returned. This does undertake
feeling and describing a little man to be sitting and a little woman to
be bathing. This is not happening and a bigger one a bigger woman is
existing and is eating and bathing and dressing and remaining and
sleeping.

Particularly penetrating and undulating when the round thing is rising
is the reaction of the feeding that rejecting is establishing the
reconciliation between antagonising and replenishing. He came to see him
again and this was on the day when he was visiting. He was talking. He
said all he was criticising. He remarked again that others were missing.
He did not undertake excepting what he was refusing. They were not
alternating often. He had been estimable. He was not absolute in
accompanying talking. He was partly not coming again and listening.

He is ardent and not derogatory and he is talking and not swaying as he
is standing and he is shortening in not betraying that he has not been
changing. He stayed longer than he was refusing to stay and this was not
embittering. He could win enough of complete likelihood to release the
volume of delicate intention. He had it then and was enough and he
stayed with ardent expression of having been continuing creating not
ceasing to be existing.

It was a fact in undertaking that they were not pursuing. It was a
farther distance and they were grouping. He who was there was often
there and he was like the remaining one who was undertaking not
pursuing. He was not pursuing. He was not remaining. He was there.

If they all knew that they had met they could say that meeting was not
meaning that all of them were all of them. They did not begin saying
anything. They could be continuing. They were all saying that they had
the likelihood of separating something from everything. They did not say
everything quite enough. Not any of them was always complaining.

It was not an arrangement when they saw that each one lived in a place
where that one was living. They did not separate then. Not any two of
them were living in the same building.

They did not undertake everything. They had what they needed when they
did not refuse anything and they did not refuse anything. They did not
have enough. They were not all of them being there then.

He was the pronouncer who was not undertaking the way to have enough
listen to every one. He could follow then and watch succeeding come to
be existing. He who was not accustomed to something did not lead the
procession as he was walking where he was talking. He was not without
freedom. He was not retaliating.

He had the way which if there was conquest was not forgiving he had the
way of keeping what was not refusing to be increasing. He did not take
enough in taking too much. He did not take plenty and he had it all when
he kept it. He was not denying intending to be asking.

There was not each one when three of them were undertaking what they
were undertaking. There was not each one when seven of them were
undertaking what they were then doing. They were not together to make a
dozen. They were there all of them and showing what they were showing as
showing was where they were showing as they were showing when they were
showing.

He did the same.

It was not the only way they came the way they all found they were
leading. They came that way. They were there. They were not when they
were everywhere they were not anywhere. They were there. They were the
present indication of being where they were leading. They were not
expelling indicating. They were not lowering exception. They were there.

They did not see a way that did not come and did not stay and did not
stay away. They saw a way that was a way and would convey the way that
would lose some way. They did not have the way that was not some way.
They had a way that were ways and they each one did not sing, they each
one had a way.

He was not over when a way was under. He was not under and he had the
way that were ways and he was not one not singing, he was one relieving
a way that way not existing. He had the way and was not pursuing
contradiction. He was keeping being expecting to be refusing intending
to accept indicating being having been in being surprising. He had some
way that was completing not intending refusing being giving receiving
being outraging captivating. He was not declining. He had not some when
he was a wonder. He was continuing.

Very likely complaining was not adjusting receiving and arranging. Very
likely complaining was not being existing.

He who undertook the most and three years was not plenty, he who
undertook something saw some one. He saw the short length of the piece
that was where it was made. He saw it where all was not made in the time
that came every other day. He saw what was not left when he did not give
away anything. He was the aggressor when there was no one who was
completely fatigued. He listened often.

He, and they were not determined then, he wore what he had and he had
what he wore. He was not adding destruction. He left when he stayed away
and he came in then and there was not complete intention. He felt
enough.

They were not too much withdrawing to achieve repenting and this was not
unnecessary, this was not at all unnecessary. The whole of it all came
to be too many and this was not at all unneccesary. They were not
adjusting what was not determined. They were not withdrawing continuing.
They were not.

They had been and they were where all the way was the coming of all of
it that was that. They did have something and they did have that and
they did go there and they did stay there and they did continue then and
they did end and they did begin and they were what was when they they
did where they did all they did as they did what they did.

They were not all there. They were there and they were when they were
where they were as they were there and they were there. They were not
all there. They were there.

He was not there as he was the one who when he was there was there and
he was there. He was there and they were not with him and they were
there they and he they were there they who were there. They were all
there.

If they were all there they were there as they were there and it was the
whole accepting, seeing, doing what was the acceptance and undertaking
that was what did not remain to deter what was that which did not
chagrin the one who was the one and they were all there that one, any
one. They were there. They stayed. He stayed. He was there. They were
there.

If there is a way to be gay it is the way that is evidently a way. They
were gay. The were gay as they were in the way they were to be gay. They
were not so gay that they were very gay. They were not all gay.

He was gay when he said he would go away. He was gay when he said that
if he would look as if he were going away he would look as he did look
when he was not gay. He said he was not gay.

They were not all gay. They said that they were not all gay. They said
that some of them said that they were gay as they were when they were
gay. They did not say that they were that they were not gay.

He who was not too proud to have the paper arranged was certainly
hesitating to give all that he asked. He did not change anything. He
kept what he hoped would be taken. He said that he had felt all that.

They who were not different did not refuse that which they had heard
that they would arrange. They did not disoblige any one. They returned
again and received something. They were not all despairing.

The meaning of undertaking was not extravagantly anticipated when they
were not older than they had been. They were not all disliking
something. They attributed the same arrangement to the thing that was
happening. They did not deny intending to be meditating. They were not
all there then. There were not too many anywhere. They were all when
they were there.

Each one of them presuming that that one was that one were not presuming
all the time that they were presuming often. Each one of them was the
opposite of something. They did not each one determine all of anything.
They did undertake enough.

A partition separating all in one room from all in another room and
which has a door is the wall that is not disturbing the condition of all
living in a building. This was not a complication. It did not belong
there where it was and that was not neccesary when they were all living.
They did change something.

They did not any of them come there where each one was living. They were
not indulging in everything.

A likely way to stay indoors is to have some interruption. They were not
dealing in undertaking removing an active cooperation. They had the
extreme way of being there where they had joined coming. This was not an
alteration. This was division. This was diminishing alternation. They
said all that which was the hearty hearing of anything which was the
combination of that thing. They did not destroy themselves then. They
were permitting all that they had as being living. They did not inhabit
every building. They were all there when they had that inspiration. They
did again when all of them were some of them. Some of them were all of
them. One of them was one and that was the state of active occupation.
All was not artificial. This was not the meaning of ending and
beginning. There could be the one who was the one who could be that one.

They were not repeating signalling to each other that they were joining
together. They did not learn to come together. They stayed when they saw
that they had a movement. They did not stay then. They did not learn all
that there was of leaving. They meant it all.

One who harmonised this did not refuse to utter something. He said that
he saw something. He did not agree to everything. He was not refusing to
neglect the rest of the things that were meaning what they were meaning.
He did not have enough distraction to occupy all the way that he moved.
He did not move too much all the time. He did what he did. He joined
some. He neglected remaining all the time. He directed that best. He was
not apportioning all the merit to each one as each one said something.
He gave everything. He used something. He did not come again all the
time. He was not withdrawing mentioning what had been mentioned. He
introduced some. He said it all. He was giving the same. He came all of
some of the ways that were not the only ways. He did not deny the same
thing again. He adjusted feeling desertion. He rearranged adding
instruction. He deserted equalisation. He regretted acceleration. He
denied intention. He agreed to description. He felt combination. He
ordered reorganisation. He atoned for beginning. He pursued realisation.
He adored distribution. He remarked domination. He altered acceptation.
He changed selection. He persisted in continuation. He achieved
elimination. He rested in conclusion. He grew older.

They were not the same when they saw it all and they did not change.
There were enough of them. One was enough and he did not change. He did
it all. He was accumulating this thing. He was not alone. He did not
know any of them then and he met them and he knew them. He went away
with one of them. He was enough.

He was not disturbing wearing what he was coming to have as a thing that
was to cover him. He did not say that he liked it more than he did. He
said he had been feeling something. He did not like to hear that he was
the one who was having what he was having. He was not refusing hearing
anything.

He had that as past what he was feeling in the future. He did not
relieve himself of all of anything. He did not order any one to come and
remain. He said that he asked all of the way meaning is being existing.
He was not dividing coming again from remaining. He was the one who had
remained and then had not left. He was the one who went where he went
and did that which was the thing that was done then. He did not
interfere with himself in hearing himself tell it all again. He was not
astonishing.

This was not the only way that he was and he was the one who was all of
that one. He did the same when he felt all he felt and he kept all he
did when he felt all he felt. He had the same explanation when he was
agreeing that he was winning as he had when he was agreeing that he was
feeling. He was not sleeping in the morning and he was eating something
in the evening. He did not turn away from this thing. He felt all that
he felt. He did what he did when he did that which he did to do what he
did. He attempted the whole way of going to be remaining and he
succeeded in staying and astonishing. He did not undertake everything.

To sweep and not to leave what is not swept up, to reply and not to
refuse to continue talking, to explain and to convince some one, to show
all and to keep what is hidden, to be expressive and to attack the
expense of travelling, to be careful and to ejaculate, to be sincere and
to be using confounding refusing with deterioration, to be moving and
steadying and surging and complaining and succeeding and grieving and
exalting and speeding and pressing and acquiring is not the same thing
as being any one. Some one is not the same and that one is not refusing
all in refusing everything. That one is the only one. He is there again.
He sits where he tells what he tells when he tells all he tells as he
tells why he tells what there is that he can tell and has told. He does
not refuse to remain although he does stay when he stays. He is there.
This is not the end of all that.

Assailable barter in withdrawing slaughter is not the least of
expression of following disaster. The ardent sitter and the intending
hearer and the reclaiming helper and the disturbing divider and the
vigorous hearer and the alarming buyer and the deep thinker and the
steady beginner, all the leader and half the seller, all the listener
and all the controller, all the etcetera and all the clearer, all the
continuer and the rest steadily staying somewhere, all the same what was
was there and what is is here. If the rest remain then getting them all
there is not laughing as each one can tell the same. They do not all
see. They have that which becomes them. They are not keeping everything.
They give it again. They say they do.

He had all when he had enough and knew them all and said it as if he saw
where he heard. He was shining and there was not all the fast bowing
that he was not doing. He did the same. He said that and something else.
He was not remaining still. He stated it all. It was there and he was
with it when he did not loan it. He did not loan it. This was not all
the same.

Way in and way on and the waiting and all and he was there and they were
anywhere when there was there and they were not anywhere but there. They
did not astonish themselves as they expected to be where there was
there. They were feeling all of it and all they said they listened not
to answer and hear but to say and see. They were the same. That was
individual. They were the group. That was the way. They said it some.
That was the rest. They saw it there. That was the reason. They felt it
all. That was the feeling. They did it then. That was their doing. They
hung it well. That was their arrangement. They were giving something.
That was their way. They helped it then. That was their expression. They
met often. That was their intention. They separated then. That was their
separation.

They were not identical with what had happened. They were not opposing
what was delighting them. They were not losing what they were saying.
They were not giving what they were urging. They were not the same.

Walking around when the wet place is drying is not causing all the
discussion which can be had when one and the other one and one and one
have put the four places together so that they all have the same
position. They describe each other. They were not darkening sitting and
not waiting. They were feeling. They could see the white cover that was
taken off when they were together. They felt all of something. They felt
all of that thing. They were all coming. They had the picture of their
having been those who had done what those had done and they had the
decision that they were seeing all that they were seeing. They did not
die one by one. They did not die, all of them. They did not see what was
the same thing as being coming to remain where they placed what they
were when they were to come to be something. They were shortly having
all the remains of continuing. They had been feeling. They had all the
same what was the rest of something. They had something.

In leaving they were not leaving what was left. They did not undertake
it all. They did not refuse this.

They were the same when they told that they were where they were they
were the same as feeling is inducing blasting. They were not the same
when they were all seeing the same expression. They were the same when
they were all giving all they were saying. They were the same when they
were helping all invitation to be existing. They were not the same when
they were not extinguishing something. They were all the same when all
of them remembered that they had yet all of the rest to see. They were
not the same when they were not wishing what they were exchanging. They
were not all the same.

He was not all the same. He did not choose to go away and leave the
refusal of adding one to one. He did not enjoy everything.

He who was not the same was the one who talking was not adjusting all he
was saying to all he was doing. He did that. He wore the same color when
he was happier and when he was duller. He wore a color and he was
showing color. That was not in him a disembarkation. He had some of the
convenience. He came to have some conveniences. He was used to them.

Some talking is all the rest when all the rest is where there is more of
that. He who was not alternating was the one who was the same and being
the same he used all of that. He did it with the way that he wore that
color more and more. He was not all the rest. There were the rest. He
was not any of them. They were there. He was there. They were not
anywhere. He was not anywhere.

Ninety-five and seventy-two are not all the numbers that he said he knew
when he said he would make an arrangement that would satisfy him. He did
not hope for more than he came to have. He allowed that he was
despairing. He said he was feeling all that. He said he was all the
same.

He said that when he heard that the only number was fifty-two he was
willing to keep it and he said that when he did not keep it he was
suffering. He said he did suffer. He said that when he had sixty-five he
was certain that he had been right. He was right and he had enough and
he kept on saying so. He said it was hard work. He said he did not
suffer but he said he did not like somethings. He said he felt that. He
said he was not obliging and he was not needing to be enterprising. He
said that he came where he came and he said that that was not all the
meaning there was when he saw all. He said he did do that. He did.

That was not the only answer there was. There was an answer that he kept
all the rest. There was an answer that he meant something. That was an
answer that he could not distinguish what was sung. There was an answer
that he kept on. There was an answer. He did not have all the names. He
knew them all. He did not stay at home. He did not like everything. He
was succeeding.

All the way he had to say that he did see the use of some who did the
same when they came to have enough to show it all. He did not sigh when
he said that he would see in the direction in which there came all the
strength that he felt there could be as each one did that which he did
in showing all there is to see. He was noble, he did aniticipate the
rest. He did release all of going often. He did visit every afternoon.
He did eat all he said he needed. He felt the complete way of feeling
what he was deciding and originating. He was not foolish. He was not
uninterested. He did not answer everything when he said that he did what
he did. All the way that there came all the rest who were strong, all
the way that each one had the life he was saying would be expressing all
the tendency to simplify what could be elaborate, all the way that there
the steady help of employing a correction and a criticism and a piece of
paper and more action, all the way each one said that he was talking,
all there was there was of living as each one is existing, all the way
that there came to be the whole of it all, all the way is not the way
they all expected to stay.

They did not smell the same when they came all the way. They did not say
that they would not put what they had where they had when they stayed.
They did not say that they had that way. They did say what they did say.

A package that is carried is a package that has in it what is inside it.
This is not the answer when some one asking is asking what it is that is
being carried. Any way of alternating visiting is one way of not going
the same way as the way some one has gone that way. This is not enough
to change everything.

All the conclusions that are beginning are not the difficulties that
each one is refusing. They were all indicating something. They had that
which they did and they sold it and some bought it. This was not
discouraging.

He said it, it was not the only way to say it, it was the only way he
said it, he said that the same was all the same, he said he was feeling
the absolute transmission of the accumulation of regarding what he was
regarding. He said he did it all. He said he was not certain. He said he
must have it, he said that the way to say it again was not the only way,
he said he would not do that, he said that he had all the rest, he said
that he had no way to come to that conclusion, he said he might wear
something to show anything, he said it was difficult, he said what he
said, he explained all that he answered, he did not recline, he was not
concentrating everlasting interruption, he did the same, he was always
there, he did not die, he was not needing everything, he was the one who
did that which when it was seen was not what he said he denied. He was
yielding. He listened then. He did not change anything. He was
necessary. He did not leave it all. He did not give anything. He was
there. He did all that. He saw the rest come to be gone. He was not
gone. He did not come to stay. He had the same.

One and here and there and somewhere and always separate and frequently
not assembling one and the others who were not the ones denying that,
some did reply when they were not denying answering. They said, each one
of them, they said it all.

Many many tickle what is not ticklish and many tickle the rest when that
is not the only way to say that every bad one and every good one is the
kind of a one to go away.

The argument that is the one to use when all argument is being used is
the one that that one uses who is that one.

All the way to keep away is the way to select all that is selected when
what has been given has been kept.

A dark and light place where the flowers are growing is the place where
any one coming and going could admire anything. This was not enough to
make all the meaning there is when one is that one and any one is some
one. There is an intermediate way of saying good-day. There is not a hot
day that is so hot as the day that is hot enough so that the ones that
are hot are hot. The darkness that comes when the half hour that is
beginning is not finished is not the same darkness as the darkness that
does not begin and is not dark. All the list that was written is the
list that is not shown. Everything is said and some one can listen.

It was not the best way that way which was the best way, the best way
was the way which was that way and that way was only that way as the way
which was the way was not darting away. There was a way. The best way
was that way the way that was that way which was the best way. All that
came and sat and stood said something and this was not a darker way of
their being an only way than any other way.

He who was independent and afraid to say that the house was painted was
independent and did say the house was painted. The house was painted,
who is afraid, that the house is painted is not any more than being
there where there is that house and the house is painted. This is not
all the way there is a way, there is more way than there has been too
much way. This is not the condition of not reminding every one of
something.

An arrangement that followed remaining together was not the only
arrangement every one made who followed every other one. There was not
every misunderstanding. There was no disposition to resist the whole
business of remaining being living.

Carting there where there was paper carting cloth there was not an
occupation. Kindly asking some one to be leaving was not an occupation.
Nobody did it.

Hardly had one who was longer than the use of color hardly had he had he
remained a long time when he came to do what he did. He used some of
that and then it did not happen that he intruded remaining. He was the
end of something.

All the many attractions of eating what is placed in a plate and put
together is there when there has been a cold winter and there has been
enough money for that to continue to be winter. It was not the mention
of everything that meant that the change had not come, it was the
beginning of something that meant the change had not come. The rest
followed later. It followed quickly and there was the same half that
together was not the whole. It was not expected. Any one refused
something.

A bargain is not a bargain if one giving is receiving and one receiving
is giving. Every bargain is the same when there are two and these two
are the two who were the two who had been any one and were then that
one. He who had all the rest did not have enough and naturally he said
that he was delighted when he had an opportunity to see that he was
there. He could not then hear what he heard and he could see what he
saw. Any one of them all was there and there were enough there so that
any one refused something and did not say no when they received all that
was offered. They did not refuse to mention everything. It ended then.
That was so disappointing.

It was earnest to stay every day, to weigh every day, to work some day,
it was earnest to say that was all day when any day was the piece of a
day when they did not stay where they would stay. They were not all not
gay. They were not gay.

They did lightly what was not lightly done and they spoke then, they had
the reception of exchanging something and they were meaning what was
happening. They did not endow the rest with everything. They had not all
the change when they left each one where that one was when he began.
They did not manage to avoid all the pieces and they knew enough to be
interested and they were not foolish, they were not busy with nothing,
they did the same, they had enough of a way, they were not having any
habit, they did it all, they said enough, they worked then, they
arranged what they came to be selecting to be arranging. They were not
suffering in refusing what they were not intending to be seeing. They
were all there.

He who said something said it in the way that did not show all there was
of what had to be. He was not reckless. He was not uncertain. He said it
all in explaining that which was there and he explained it so that there
could be that explanation. It was all there and complete. He went on. He
was not the half of all there was as there were some and he was the
whole of it all. That was not enough. Anything stopped. That was not
undertaken. He had the meaning.

Conversation was not the reproduction of listening and talking and this
was said and when there was more there was some understanding of that.

It is apparent that when each one is sitting where it is cold that the
lamp which is burning is the lamp they are using. This has been and will
be the habit that has not that meaning.

All the best that came when all that came was all that came was said
when each one said that they each read and said what they each said and
they each read. The basket that did not remain on the floor was not
empty when all that was thrown away was put in it. The alarming way that
each one did not throw away what was taken away did not dissatisfy every
one. There could be conversation.

He said that he had put the piece that was there when he went away in
the same place that it was now when it was there. His wife said that she
remembered something. He did not then say more than he said. Not any one
left the room. They all were busy.

He did not live by the light that there was when he went to live where
he stayed some months. He talked about everything. This was not needed
then but it was a very good thing as a way to begin and to have begun.
He was satisfying.

The darkness was the same when he came in and when he went out and he
talked about that when he talked about everything. He said he had had a
little girl. He said the whole family were not there. He did not say
that he needed everything. This was not what he said when he said what
he said and he said what he said. He was not the only one and yet that
was enough, that he was the one. There were some who said the same. He
was not one.

Darkness is not black enough to have the same feeling that it has when
not any one who is grieving is saying that it is a peculiar thing to
adopt a child that is born and then to keep her. It was understood. Any
one told the rest and it was not the only way to work every day and to
have the whole piece covered so as to be as it was gay. The last time
that there was the whole big piece was the time when the green and the
blue and there was some red too was the time when it was all largely
covering what was not too pretty to be lost. It was then sold and
everybody was satisfied. Some said that to pay for it then meant that
that was not the only way to keep it a long time. A half of all that was
said was said when the rest of what was paid was paid. Any one was
content. Some liked something.

The continuation was there and the last were not leading. This is not
audacious. This is the climax of having a cooler climate than there had
been.

The summer sun was not shining and the winter was not congealing and the
ardent expression of satisfaction was not mystifying any one speaking
the language that have meaning. Any language is the same when they all
speak a few words of some and some speak all the words they are using.
It was not mingling beginning and ending. It was not disturbing spending
the afternoon and the evening. It was not always disturbing the morning.
Enough had been received so that very many who came sat together. This
did not originate sneezing. This did quiet moving. This did stimulate
renewing the breathing. They were all there. They came on time. They
were all there the ones who claimed to be the half of everything. They
did not refuse to discriminate. They shown out when they did not put
there the thoughts that were the first and then the next and then the
last. They remained away when they had all that day. They did not see
the remainder who did not stay. They went away. Some can come any day.
That is always a piece of the half that is distributing everything. Each
one was there. The union was not confusion. They had all that they had
when they saw each other. They mentioned something.

He and he was not the lonely one when he ate all that he ate and he was
not alone, he was not the happy one when he had what he had when he was
happily there and sleeping some, he and he was not demeaning himself
when he came again and he was always coming and was talking, he was not
sacrificing when he was suffering and he was suffering resolution and
undertaking and enlarging and he was not the peculiarly losing kind of a
one any one was who was not continuing increasing, he was the one and he
was the only one and he was the one and meeting was meeting and
summering was summering and wintering was wintering and a flower garden
was a flower garden; he was one and the neighbors were not leaving and
he was not leaving and he was not destroying the rest and they were not
destroying anything, he was one and he said the same and he said it all
and he changed the whole when he had the dog that he had when he went
and he had the dog that he had when he came and he did not stay that a
dog could stay and he did not stay when he went away. He was not lonely.
He was not stationary. He was not escaping. He was not busy. He was not
walking. He was not running. He said he slept pretty well. He said that
what he did was like that which was all the same and he said he knew it.
He said he showed the rest when everybody turned the rest of it into the
light where it was bright and he was bright and he said he told the
friends who were together that he had not made the weather. He was not
angry.

If the covered space has the same size as the little pieces that one
left then the trouble when an explanation is due is not in listening
when there is repeating. They were not anonymous.

Barring the size of the thing that is where it is there is no reason why
a larger thing should not reproduce a little thing and this was not the
only way to disturb everything. There were some ways of finding a
beginning.

It hardly came to be altogether that they were not separated and they
did not say that when they spoke of anything and what was a brighter
light was brighter and the little pieces were mentioned. It was not
astonishing.

They came there. They had that to do and that was not that proceeding.
They had that piece of the way. They did not die early. They did not
piece the whole that was a piece together. They were universal when they
came to travel. They did not explain. That was they came and they did
not rest together. They had talked.

Not to disappear when they are not there was not the way they said they
had come to stay. They were industrious.

The watching they did was not the only way they had to show all that it
meant when they were discouraged. They were discouraged.

They had not the length of the time that it takes to change the place
where they were going to. They did go there.

It was not remaining the half of all there was when they saw that they
could see each other. They did not stay. They all went away. They did
not lose anything. They said that. It was not a determination.

He who had not said that he was not cheerful said that he had come to be
hat the rest were not when they were otherwise. He was not talking. He
left early. He knew how to say that he had that way. This was not
distinguishing. He was not lonesome. He was alone. He followed that
enough. He was not magnificent. He was the undertaker.

All that there was when there came to be the best there is where all
there was was shown to look as it did look was the best way to say that
it was there and beauty is the thing to see. They did not talk enough.
They were talking.

When it came that all that was apart was visiting it did not seem that
everybody was talking.

It had to do with the place where there was not any disarrangement and
there everything was on the floor. They did not all talk then.

This was not the only way to say that there had come to be three ways of
offering what was being given. One was a perfect way, that did not have
any protection, that had what it had when a covering was fitting, that
kept some in. Everybody was not anxious to laugh. It was not too
perilous. There was a way which was a way and a solid piece came off and
nothing was happening. Nobody was glad. Everybody was looking. It helped
some. It was not autocratic. It was not a mystery. There was a way which
was a third way and anybody could refuse to exclaim. It was not
prohibitive. It was concubining. It was sweetly beginning. It had a
pretty reflection. It was angust. It held the rest. It was not
particular. It was chased. It was pelucid. It was clearly automatic. It
held the blessing.

That was not the only way the way the sinking came to relieve the place
that was there. They were not authoratative. They had the practice. It
was not the rest of all that way. To be lightly dusting is to have the
coal full of iron and this does not keep all of a little stove together.
It can be seen.

Like the arrangement of the place where the pears are not brighter the
time has not come when the last piece has been seen. It is not
investigated because there having been the parlor there has come to be
the place there where any one could stay together. They are not
visiting. That is to say part of the time they are away. It is not
passed when the whole of it is there. They are included. They do not
destroy the whole of it without selling. They have sold some. They are
there.

If they were the best and they had been accustomed to moving they would
have been there when they did not move away. They had that condition. It
was not undermining.

They did not see the same when they were not lame and they never were
lame and they sent away some of the children. They did not mean that the
other place was not farther. They did think that they saw which was not
too much wetter. They liked a piece of the middle of the morning. They
did not stop often in the afternoon. They did not use any evening. They
were not alone. They went away. They did not forget the pieces of
furniture.

The labor of losing what there was not any soporific in adopting was not
agonising. There had not come to be division. There was that article.
They saw that away. It was not a comfort. They had that to keep the
place away. They were not blameworthy. They had the old season.

They did not anticipate lightly. They had the medium which was the
medium of having gone to see something where it was raining. They did
not tell the same then when they had that energy. They were not
progressive.

A dark day is a day when the light is away and the light has been lit
and the fire has not gone away and the day that has been a dark day is a
day when the flowers are gay and the color that is there is staying
there. That is a dark day.

Coming away is not staying away. That is not the way that he who came
away and lived there where he came away would come away when he came to
go away. He liked something. He said that that was not too much of a
home. He said that that was not the only meaning there is in telling
what he was telling. He was not denying something. He had that tender
expression. He accepted the hospitality that entailed eating what was
cooking and he ate what was cooking when he was walking. He did not
disturb the reason. He was not irregular.

The precious piece that had the hand that was not too nicely finished
was the thing he kept when he saw where it was. It was not very likely
that he remembered that it had been had. It was not certain that he was
not remembering borrowing something. He was not likely to say that he
had seen it most. He was certainly sure to have it then. He spoke of it.

That substance that had the slight weight that made it fall when it was
in the air was not the same as the thing he had when he did not give
back anything. He did what he should when he should do what he did. He
was reliable. He was the certain fashion of continuing when there was
not any question that he was not forgotten. He did not have that as a
thing to do. He was not escaping.

He had the certain pleasure of authentication and he was not the
monopoly of having everything. He was not parsimonious and he was not
omnipresent.

The ones who were and they said nothing were not saying the same. They
said something.

Kindly expecting that the things that would not be lasting would be
disappearing they did not disorganise exhibiting something. They were
continuous. They were not suffering.

If there is enough to do a certain way comes to be any way that some one
receiving something is distributing what he is selling. This was not the
beginning.

They were the ones being friends and they spoke then about what was
happening. They did not alter everything.

They were the ones who had that they were not the ones who were then the
ones and they did not dispute when there was that discussion. They had
the price that was the right one when no other piece was a piece. They
did not hesitate. They were all they had when they did not have all they
had and they had enough to be there when they did not choose what they
chose to say. They were not braver when they were not more insistent and
they were not more together when they were not more tolerant. They did
not defer what they did when they showed what they had done. They were
all the addition which was not too determined. They were saying that
which they said was what there would be seen when there was not all the
attendance that there would be when some were looking. They did not rest
with that authentication. They did not double up. There was not the
complication of the same when there was that separation. It did not
determine that.

If there was the whole way to go when there was a ticket that was bought
then certainly they did not go to stay away. They went to stay there.
That was that time.

They were lively, that is to say they were not in the way. They were not
away when they were there and they certainly had not gone away. They
were not in the way there.

It is not tolerable that the one who is in any way away is in every way
away. He is away.

The constant particular division which is not in unity is not there when
there is more than there would be if the following were not coming. The
following went away. That did not change anything.

It is very likely that the habitual reminder is the one that has been
put where there is the place where more would not be separated from
every one. There is that foundation. The present day which has not
passed away when the beginning has come and any one is prepared for that
thing being the thing which is the thing and it is the thing, the
present day which has not passed away is not the trifling thing that it
never did refuse to have copying, it is the best habit there is of not
commencing more often than there is frequent practice. They did not
decline.

Out from the whole which was the present there there had not been to be
the whole which was all there. They did not think again. They did all
that.

They had the way and certainly there was in the piece and certainly
there was the whole certainly there was the integral part that did not
make what was clear dear. They did not have all that to do. They had
been begun.

If it were not so much and there had not been some, if there were always
and there was not enough, if it was what they did when they were there,
if they were and they did this then, if they had that delineation they
were the time when there was not all there was as there always is all
there is. There was what there was.

They did not blame their best way when they succeeded and they did not
succeed when there was all that had not been sold. They were not silent.

They who did not dedicate the remainder of following to arranging to
remian together had been the ones stirring. They were all the entire
body and they did not see the same aptitude. They agreed in something.
They were not antagonistic.

There was the stretch between the summer and the winter and they were
not long in separating. They did not refuse everything.

They had the likelihood of interpreting that they were hearing what was
the aspect of that which was not to be divided. They were not
disappointed They had that sorrow, they were not safe.

That was all that was likely to be taken when they did join some one who
was not refusing to agree about that. They did not then lose everything.
They continued to be exemplary.

Mounting up into that place where the same change is not happening is
that way when there is that petition. They did not abandon that
practice.

He who was there was showing the coat he was buying. He had that
repetition.

He marked any place and he did not doubt that what he heard was what he
heard about. He was plastering the building and he had it leaning and he
saw that coming and going was spending a whole situation. He did not
linger and staying was the piece that if he had that attention would be
the same as anything. He went on the train.

Partly going he came there deciding. He had that interest. He came to
see the things he put where they were. He said he liked to look. He said
that that was the way. He said he did not have that feeling.

He did not change the day that he came to stay away. He found that he
was not going any longer. He said that that was interesting. He said it
was evidently so.

He had all those there who had that pair of light and bright mixture.
They were not disgusting. They paid something. He did not change that
expression. He did not need the rest. He did not keep on more than that
time. He was not another one.

He was the same who did solve that which was not that problem. He had
all that way and he did see the same which was the result and sewing
that was the same as the day. He did not die.

He was the past place when there was not a race and he was living then
and burying was nothing. He was undertaker.

He had the amplitude and larger and larger did not mean that the space
was diminishing. He was not there to be emptying the attention. He was
the placed plan when there had been. He was not diluted.

He who had the ostrich was having the feathers that were not falling. He
did use something. He saw the difference when it was a turkey. He needed
all that inclination. He said some were useful. He did not mind
irreligion. He had that application.

All the plentiful snow was not too much if there was riding and there
was riding when there was traveling. There was traveling.

He did the plentiful flowers all the colors that were not lost in the
rain, He said that he had that feeling.

He was producing that which if there was that adaptation would be large.
It was large. He showed it. He said that he had not seen the end and he
said that that which was the same was apparent. He said he had been
pleased.

He was not behaving as he would have if he had not come in the evening.
He came any day. He was the same.

All the place that there would be tickets are the places where there is
no admission and this does not pain every one. This is the solution.
They did not die. They were progressive.

All alike who were different saw the establishment which was leafy and
they did not deny it all. They came to call. This was no pleasure.

A feeling that there is nearing what is influencing preexisting is not
calculating that there is relaxing succeeding when the time is not
removing. They had that to do.

If there was a large one to show that a head is thicker behind than
where the head gets smaller, if there was a large one to say something
he had some reason for saying that he had not lost what he had taken. He
made that point often. It was not an object. There was not that
attention.

He did yield wine and a dog and rugs and a pigeon and a nice hand that
was needing that setting. He did not flourish then. He had to be
supported. He was excused. That was that thing.

He who was the rest to be was not dated, that is to say he had the date
any day and he was careful where to lay each date away. He did not keep
himself. He was winning. He had the best understanding when he was
explaining and he had the best said when he had it blue and green and
yellow and white and orange and black and red. He was not distracted.

Finishing is not establishing the settlement that buying a house is
destroying. There is not any way to regret all that. The voyage is not
long and so far away there is that to say that it is not raining and
saying that places some in that position. It does not change any hope.
There is not more of that.

He who came to be gaily framing was not earnest when he said that he had
destroyed some color. He meant to say that it was a pleasant day and he
meant to say that if he went away he meant to say what he meant to say.
The whole burden was taller. This did not keep him feeling the death of
every one. He was the same. He had the place changed when there was some
building and he did not say more that he had the time to say as he had
to say that he had that way to go away as he had to say that he would go
away. He did go the next day. He was not there to go away.

On the old arrangement there were the three and he said that he was not
easy, he said he felt that it was not the same and five would be more
than three. He said that five were there and he said that was what he
said he had to say. He came away. They were not away. He said he did not
see the whole day and he said that was what he did say. He said he did
not say that he would go away. He said that one who went where there was
air would stay there. He said that one who went where there was enough
to forget that there were many away would stay there. He said that one
who went where after what had happened nothing happened would stay
there. He said he would go away at once and he said he was busy. This
did not make him forgetful. He said he had all that to do. He did not
say that he was the only one who was happy enough to look up when the
train went away. He had that sun.

Pardon the exercise of the feeling that makes him say that the thing
that that he has is tender. He is not a deceiver and he does not throw
away having not come to say how do you do when he has spent some days.
He said he did not understand all that had had that color. They met.
This was not the only way to do.

He who was the one to do that which later was not weaker was the one to
do that which later was not weaker. He had that way when there was any
day and surely the long road was not so short when he was the same size
he had been. He had that engulfing feeling. He did not go away to dine
and stay. He did not go away.

He and even then there was all the time that taking one train meant when
he had that ticket. He did not use that which he changed and he was not
far away. He did not go to stay. Anyway he did not say that it was gay.
Anyway he had that reasonable institution and the foundation of that was
just the same fashion as the baking was when all of it was done. He had
a lighter feeling.

So then there is to be the week which is occupied when the door that
went to show the way was not closed when he came home and it was not
always later. He had the station and he had that desperation. A
concluding sentence was not always unfinished. So then there was that
sun.

A wait that is not so long that any one is tired is long enough to
occupy all the day and the evening. That is not enough to stop all
working. Working is existing.

To present the time that made the hope that a feeling was not passing
was not so hearty when the time was all prepared. Not any time was
prepared.

Larger and shorter than the size that has that shape, the louder and the
clearer than the color that has that day for not being any dimmer, the
higher and the later than the place that has that pleasure, the
reception that has that trouble, the place that is not what any place
that is a different place is when there is a place, all the ten pieces
and the room was not bigger, all the day when the days are not colder,
all the nights when the bed is not larger, all the best rejection of a
value in all that explanation, the reception was that which made the
place which did not shadow the continuation.

If the time that the action which was a baby was the same as all the
drawing then there was that devotion and marrying was that which
expressed the rest. It had all the time that there was not all that
depression. He went there and came back to the sight. He did not use it
the old way.

He was that which was not added when the day was a pleasant day. He was
that which was not taken away when the day was a pressing day. He was
that which was there when filling was acting in the direction which
causes that which is to be that which is there.

He had not all this to refuse beginning and he was not all there was to
discover when all there was was what there was. He was always where
there had the expression of something of that which was acting where
there can be what there is of that expansion. That is the color.

Refuse to die and not get thinner is not to sleep when something that is
threatening is after one day explained away. He did not dream
everything.

He had not that beginning. He did not begin the remains and he had all
that to pierce when he came to the condition.

He was the one who had not all of that sun. He did not see that
distraction. He did not have all of that which was not all there is of
that sturdiness.

To sit where there is that copy was not the time that he did not use.
And he was practicing having that distribution. He did not change it
all.

He was the present time and he did not expect to bargain when he had the
little that was not always what he did not throw any way. He came to do
all of that when he did what he did and he said all of that when he said
everything he said. He was not practicing being painstaking. He had
nothing to do. He was not continuing expectation. He had all of that
burden. He had that inspiration. He was not denied. He did not awaken
all the frame. He had that as a multiplication.

If there was all there was of settling there was all there was of all
that agitation. He changed that position.

The likely thing to do is not to suffer most and then draw the card
under the door that is left on the floor the likely thing to do is to
burden the room when it has not any of that which is all there is of
any gloom. This does not distract everything. This does not make all
there is of a bright light.

All walk and all do not sadden that which is not talk. If they say that
they do they stay when they do. This is not the same spirit.

If they meet and they share anything of what they see when they stare
and see and when they see and pass that day then they are different.
They are then not glued together.

The big separation that which that day was all the day made them both
look at all the drawing. They said the same thing. That did not make any
of that pleasure. No one is stouter. No one is passing a medium sized
woman. They had the time. They were not astonished. They were not
meaning moving. That was not that beginning. They did not finish
walking. They did not engage talking. They did not refuse a share. They
went somewhere. They had that happening. That was several times. There
was a time when there was not that time. There was not any time. There
was not any of that time. They had that sweetness. They were not met.

They did not descend that day and they were not busy. They had all that
length. They were led there.

The trace of that place and that was not remembered was there and they
went that day. They did not search that division.

It was not the only objection that which they said talking, they said
that that effort was the one that was not all of that acceptation. They
did not answer.

Not that, not the same frame not the exchange not the refusal, not the
voice or the tone or the care and regulation, not the particular
discrimination, not the agreement, not the passage not the only time
there is every day, not the time of the year and the time of the day,
not the two who were there were the two who passed out to see that view.
They did not always say good-bye. They do not stay to say what they say.
They do not pass away.

Darkening little squares does not shape the larger piece that has a
frame. That can begin.

It was not a whole time. Any connection is that which each one being
what is that direction has to put into what is not holding. There is not
regrettable decision.

That was not one way. One way was to pass that which is not left. One
way was each way.

Any number of all is the contesting that the two who are different are
not darker color. The color does not make them resembling. They do look
at what they have left. They do not see that.

Angles cannot destroy and the round places can not color the white and
the black and the yellow. This is not the presence of any indication.
All the meetings have not been disarranged.

A little more of three and any more of two and more than enough is all
there is when there has not been any retraction. Everybody can change
something.

A little tone and there is none and surely any sun is warm and warming
best has all the time when there is not all darkness that will shine.

A fast hold when the dog lies down does not show that each one has been
puzzled it shows that the time that has been refused has been the time
when the two who were not angry were annoyed. This is suffering. This is
the way to sit and say this is that way to pray.

All the time there comes a practical change in what is not the whole
exhibition. Any exhibition is what is not so sad but that everybody is
talking. These had that reason. They told it to each other.

A little way to say there is not that way is what is not discouraging. A
whole meeting is not when each one sees something. A whole meeting is
when each one sees something that is disturbing. A whole meeting does
not happen again.

The time that is lost is the time that is german, the time that is lost
is the time that is american, the time that is lost is the time that is
american, the time that is lost is the time that is bulgarian, the time
there is lost is the time that is russian, the time that is lost is the
time that is hungarian, the time that is the time that is norwegian,
there is a time that is japanese and it has that way of being the time
that is lost and the chinese way is all of that way and the swedish way
is anyway of that way and there is an english way.

Attend the closing of the door and the knocking at the door and the
opening of the door. Attend the evening.

Feel the asking if it is colder when the fur is thicker. Change the
invitation so that any eating can happen all one evening. Give the time
away that some one will not delay to stay. It is a happy whole
beginning.

The mending that was done was finished when the separation meant that
finishing something is more beautiful than anything. This did not make
the regret more delicious. This did not hurry every one any way. All the
return that there is when the whole time is spent is in the way there is
the exchange of that relation. This did occupy some intention. They had
all that to dictate.

If a little passage that opened on the street had a sign up that was not
neat then surely when two were not crowding there was room to wipe up
some thing. This did not make a mess.

There was never a neglected family. This could not be. How could they
agree that this would not be the moment to alter and have them talk
together. There was never such a question. Such a change had not that
selection.

It is high that which was blinking, it was not prepared with the idea of
elevation. Any one who gave one something had that bewilderment. They
were not far away. They did not rub what they rubbed when they did not
rub away what they rubbed when they rubbed away. This was not their
occupation.

There are three, there are a great many, some are more that is there are
some more, some are clamoring.

If three are there and they do not care about that then it is important
if it is important.

The way of approaching remaining alternating between that realisation
and distinguishing receiving that distinction is the way to say that
some have the change of any three. That does not alter all feeling. That
does alter all that is altered and anything is alright if all that is
said is enough said and more is said. It is quite the best way to refuse
the certainty that the three are not only not all there but not
everywhere. They are each one the best part of being alone that is to
say when they are not accepting and refusing. They are always not quite
returning. They have each one that of their organisation. They can be
seen. That is not the only way to say something there is to say by any
one who is to say what there is to say of each one of them being any one
who is and having all of some which is recognition. This does not
outbalance that which is not denied. That does not make any agreement.
If there was more to do there would be more as there are not a few. Each
one has that entire system. Each one is not lonesome.

One is not one of three. There is no place for anything and any place
that is occupied is occupied. The demand that is made is not denying
that the whole place is not bigger and yet it is, of course it is, of
course the whole place is not bigger, when it is the whole place there
is no crisis and if there is a crisis is not there always the change of
place where the advantage is the same and the addition is not kept away.
Certainly all are when they are when there are enough to be not much
more than completely separated. Any one can talk of one.

There is the sound that has no reverberation and if enough are occupied
then surely they will change all of some of most of their minds. That
does not beat all instruction.

And so there are not there every day and this is not to say that there
are not always three. Always there are three, those three are three and
that does not make a number, there is not a number that is three.

One and one and one, there are none, that is to say they have not that
meaning. There are three that is to say they have not any such meaning,
they have not any meaning of being three, they do not do so.

Any use that there is in exclusion does not include two numbers. If any
one is mentioned, three are not mentioned. One is mentioned, three who
are mentioned are mentioned. That does not show meaning. They have not
any union. They do not come to separate. That is not something that has
come together. They are there, everywhere. That is the way to mean that.

If a cause that is not put there where the world is full when it is not
pressing is in that place there there is not any need for success. It
comes where it is when it is early. Anyway there can be a change in
time. All of the progress does not change the number. There are no
arrangements.

Attacking the whole stage means that there is more sold than there has
been money received and this is not enough to discourage production.
Feeling is the inclination that connects something to the color and
sometimes the whole page is different and then there is a time. It is
not despair that gives any indication. After all there is not more than
a test. There is any kind of a joke. There is not failure.

The older they grow the more there is to show if there is what there has
been when all that is made is anywhere and this was not a sign of that
time, this was the best sign and the only time was where there was that
future.

All the time there is the use of that expression. All the time means
that. That which is full is not pouring out in every direction and this
is to prove that there can be different minutes. It is not necessary to
prove everything. There is not use for more than all and yet there is
not reason why there is not. None at all, no reason. There is not that
disadvantage and they can suffer. They hear what is said when they
listen where there is talking.

Largely pressing the separation and then each one is not visiting and
then there being any more and then the nice present, this is not the
secret of that life.

Not a describer nor a ruler nor a mingler and yet there is not a
difference that is not greater. Feeling that the expression is the one
that is creating and there is no disturbing all distraction, having the
tensing of the intention that is resurging and there is then no moving
that is not eventualising. Not daring and not curving and not drowning
and not plunging and alluding to nothing is all the way. Abandoning and
pasting and arising and not drying and bemoaning the plantation is not
every way.

A shout is not a noise when there is no reverberation. A shout is not
subdued and the pushing has some resistance when there is not too much
help. He did not faint away. He did not faint any.

He was the salt of that pepper and there was no mixture. The beginning
was that he saw that and made it taste the stronger. The end was that he
used that and it was never weaker. He was not outlandish.

He who had that meaning was averting no inundation. He was not so old
that he was older and he had never been always the same. He repeated
that story.

There are a pretence of destruction and this does not mean that not all
of it is destroyed, it does mean the end of that which is not a verdict.

The place of common color is the place of a relation. And the place of
education is the place of some examination. The parting of the beginning
is the using of every name in every description.

This comes to be the same and then all that is any more is so lively
that there is color enough to be the same. That is what is not denied
and all the time there is all of that said which is and is to be.

The difference is not more when nothing is the same. That is not the
time that has been taken. The time that has been taken has not been
removed from any brick. All the reds are golden.

The settlement that is older is the one that uses horses. The settlement
that is younger is the one that owns one dog. The settlement that has
the meaning is the one that says that woman. A very strong thing is
everything. All that is alike is different colors.

There is the time when the agreement is such that something placed in
the middle is not avoided. That does not make that occasion.

The presence of three does not make the four and four are not necessary
when there are five.

Planting nothing is not showing all the whole place that is so full that
if there were more room there would be more of everything. That does not
mean that there is distance. That does mean that the whole extension is
not over all when there is more to see and hearing is the way to
explain the difference.

The white face that has the color is not the same as the red which is
close to be the black. These colors that have that blessing are the same
as those that are not used. This is gentle. The best thing to say is
that there is a change. Then the union of that mission makes those send
a message and any one coming back is writing.

All the time and not any more width than there is breadth and not any
one shorter than more than one. This is not discouraging.

All the time that was used by the action was not so long but that there
was time to receive that. That when it is there is so munificent. It is
so august and so dense and the movement is not so automatic that there
will be any disuse. All planning is the same.

The way to use that which is what has that use is to fill what is there
and to cover what is beside that. That is the only way to use enough and
more than enough is anticipated. It is more than a prediction.

In returning there is not more telegraphing than there is requesting no
decision. This does not show more than is to be used. This can be
overweight. All the noise is not drowned out. There is all day and more
than any week.

The use of a place is that which when there is that criticism there can
be description. This does not flavor any eating. It does flavor a
recitation.

There is no more title than that which is abused and there is no more
meeting than that which is described and there is no more description
than there is interpretation. There is more enjoyment than there is
laughing. There is more laughing then there is decision. All the rest
comes some way.

To be there where morning mingles with something is the same time as
most pleasure and this would be work if there was carrying enough to
accomplish that. This finished then and there was no more of that
provision. The experience of this piling was such that to sit in front
of more means enough to use all the time. This does not indicate
research and it does not indicate transmigration. It indicates more than
any obliteration. The whole example is such that if there is a way to
ride there can be a stable and if two are not there they can travel.
Three are separated and more are enough to use a casual bath. This meant
every day and also exercise. One bed was used. This was a change.

All the pouring of the rain, all the darkening in the evening, all the
trains leaving and all the little fish-bones cooking, all the principal
away and all the comfort of a home, all the pleasure of a pulpit, all
the joke of wearing slippers, all the best dog to bark and all follow
and the pleasure in a lily, all the open space inclosing, all the
listening to what is hearing, all of this and stay to go, that is one
way to expect a person.

A peculiar state does not show in the color that arouses question, it
shows in the way there is more time to spare and more times to expect
multiplication. It has been there and there is no doubt that if the time
had not been the same some one would have been discovered. The way to
expect that condition was to melt more who were saying that they had not
been and that they were going and that they were saying what they were
saying. This was not an only recompense.

The placer of more had a room and this was not there to show that there
was not any more. The burden of noon was not so delicate but that there
might have been a suggestion.

The finish which would mean that there were no places where there was
complete separation would not mean that there are not more coming. To
begin the end is not the time when the weather is not colder. The warm
day is that when there are three places. The pleasure of that is that
the splendid inscription is printed and the place is occupied.

All the longing that was joined by each one having that there was not
such that anything was filled so that there is a house to leave. This is
the division that makes that meaning.

It was not strange that the cow came out and the square was there and
the heat was strong. It was not strange yesterday and the period that
made more difference did not come at the time. There was plenty of time.
More time had that meaning.

The use of that plain that was not covered with more than roses meant
that the distance was such that it could be distinguished.

The meaning of some pleasure is that the origin of that expression means
more than the use of every object. This is the expression of beginning.
This is the climbing following. This is the merit of more than that
explanation.

The use of the little thing makes the big thing not use weighing and
this which is a marvel is not a tremor it is not any shape or kind of
undertaking. It is more than that origin. It is the poke.

All the weight which is of a different color makes the different colors
brighter or not so bright or just as they were or changed. This has the
meaning of the length of time.

The good of any use is the principal of readaptation. The best way to be
solemn is to disturb all that work. This security means more than
re-establishment, more than meditation. It means the best the time will
defend.

All this was not so sad Sunday and this was why a little dancing is not
refining. It shows more than just this. It shows balance and
continuation and believing in marking and it also does show that some
one will settle there. It does mean that. More see the price. That is a
pleasant way to re-exchange a union. This does not make a refusal seem
shallow. This does not make for more youth. This does not change it all.
This does have that meaning.

Lump of love, thick potato soup with a green that is bright and not
dingy, a green sash that has that color and is not in opposition to any
other, all alike have that place and the seasons are not so short and
all milk has a cream color.

Union is not strength and division is not disaster, separation is not
unwieldy and perpetuation is not friendly.

To darken a day it is necessay to travel more and to accompany that with
that expression and certainly there has come to be more meaning in a
piece that is bought than in a piece that is sold.

A way of erecting a room is the way there comes to be no use in having
that right. This is certainly no breaker of bargains.

Certainly not, that which is honest and arranges that obligation is not
telling more of remembering the Hurds. Not more than there is of
exchanging a time to have the thing gone and meeting no frown. Not that
alone which uses that to-day any day.

That is all so new where there is no rebearing that which is not heard.
A sound is not a waste when there is the same to come.

A long while when the increase is so gradual that three pairs are all
not the same age as the time that is not gone, a long simple bath is
that which any day is at an open window, a long simple bath is that when
every day the floor is cleaner, a long simple bath is that which is not
only practiced by the pleasure in the finger. A long simple bath is
contiguous to a certainty.

The pleasure of that is not that an oyster is colder or that a rabbit is
hotter. The pleasure of that is that there is need of the anger.

The use of a horse is that when there is plenty it is not only a heel
that is caught. Two horses are quieter and the time is enough in the sun
when it is not summer.

The pleasure is not the same and the reason is more. There is that
pleasure in all union. The hands are there and so are the feet and all
in between and above are complete.

Press no bursting elephant and do not cause pain. The sensible way to
be sweet is to answer more and to be present.

That which brings it all is what there is when it comes out. There can
never be any kind of groaning that is not so appetising as that
recognition. This makes a time express that.

If the place is so full that there are people everywhere then it is a
kindly way to make everybody see that they stay. Any center is so light
because there are two there and more. One is having that. He is not
using any more drinking. This makes that continue to be the same. There
is no emptying of more than that.

Teaching the present table of contents to expand in that direction does
not mean that talking comes more easily in every language. It does mean
that the use of all of it yesterday made the table have only one waiter.
This did not ease the ones saying the same of a plate as they do of a
saucer.

All the time to rest and not any time of day to go away is not so much
more pleasing than an afternoon.

There is a stranger and a shorter time and everything is longer. There
does not seem to be a rest when there is a certain assurance for
certainly there is more money spent and there is all that time to
please.

Those who were so measured that there was the difference between green
and yellow were not astonished when they were seeing red. Any color is
different. This is not a law.

The clear light that is bright is not so bright as a green color that is
not blue. That makes more change than a decision.

So then there is no charge for more height than the sixth story and the
whole way has one more room. That is no mere change.

Blanket the mist of a prick. This was not the way to steady the march of
twenty thousand. All the sand has left some clay and more chance than
enough is that and the season has any number of detestable margins.

A tune is not so slender so that a large surface has aspiration. The
darkness and the light that is used is all the second day after the
third day.

To please more is to have a whole account of an advertisement. This is
not for sale.

Place a table and three chairs, place a pocket and two matches, place a
diagonal and three rulers, place a sign and every color, place an autumn
and three summers, place a winter and three countries, place a city and
the rest, place away, all the time is wrong when there is no more to put
anywhere.

A speech is so transferred that alas is not mentioned and a word is the
same as the separation is expected. The whole time of trial is in the
recitation of the vowels and also in the recitation of the figures.

The splendid strength of the dense coal and the stove that is partaking
in any noise in any vacation is so sweetly an origin that the meaning is
never confused.

Tender and not so blue, pink and white, not any shadow darker and
anything green greener, a stalwart arch and more than an orange, much
more than any orange, all the tightness is identified and the hurry is
not articulate and the space is enthusiastic. This and not so much
passage is the beginning of that entry. All the politeness of returning
later and being in a hurry before then is not more than being late and
beginning automatic running. A collision is not usual. A little piece of
gum is the same.

There can not be any appointment when the organ of return is not
resisting any intermediate use. The coal oil is in their very well.

The design is so disturbed that the fire does burn. That goes on to make
little pieces redder. That shows the sense there is in the face.

Any following is so certain that the choice of more is all expressed.
The union of an emigration with an arrangement is distressing if the
whole place is shown to be there. There is more comfort.

There is the western bridge and there is water, there is more cover and
there is plenty of air. There is a whole expression of no wish.

The music of the present tense has the presentation of more accent than
the best intention multiplies. The method in it is not more to be
deplored than the unification is represented. The best passage is not
more likely.

Straining that particular qualification and not having that measure in
meaning meaner pressure is so unlikely that there is no dispute. The
certain case is sure. That was the tame darkness and thunder did make
all the time and no measure of meaning indicates the time rightly when
the mischief is over. There is the produce, there is the weather, there
is the learning, there is the little bits of ground where telephoning
has meaning. That is the state of yesterday. More is coming to-morrow.

Darker and the season has the summer, dirty and not so continuous as
winter, not more not less, the time was used up already and there always
will be steadiness. That increase is sure.

Darker and the music softer when sighing makes no breeze and talking
makes the beard turn in to every center. Lighter and the water having
every color, darker and the flowers every color, darker and the silent
way to come again and resolving nothing that is not the use of a
morning, darker and the strange situation not so pleasant as fried eggs
when they are not cheaper.

Darker and the mention of moonlight is stirring more sameness than any
desperation that has no defeat. The window which has no seat and the
rooms that have that way of coming together made the same change that
had been made when the result was difference. The light was clear.

So then the same which was a laugh was the only use of a result that was
prepared to remain away. Supposing any one had an invitation, supposing
any one, then certainly this would be the perfect situation, and more
than that, any more than that, more than that that is the present
release of all the toys. So there is not any more the use of it all and
certainly more is so long that enough is not used, certainly not.
Certainly not, very certainly not and yet if that which is so very close
has all that air what is the hope of a refusal, what is it. There is a
hope of a refusal and that hope is so fixed, so remaining employed when
there is enough to pay, so ingenuous and so small that any market is the
place where something is not bought and not sold. So then there is
disunion.

Pleading is not in unison. The change that makes a red coat has so much
liberty that a custom to remain inside does not disturb the horse. So
then the present day was that meant by the line.

Pecker which is red, which has a colored head, which has a rose chin,
which has a covering then, a pecker is not bound by any such action.
Certainly not and there is no variety.

So much wedding, so much distribution, so many night shirt-waists and so
many linen dusters accepted, so much breakfast and nothing sooner, such
a joy is without alloy.

Plain table and a dinner and a chocolate supper, a roasting rabbit and a
supposition, this is simpler than after dinner and no time is more
important.

A lesson which has no mission and an explanation made so much magazine
that there is more power and so Saturday is every day and a declaration
is sardines and is not pickles.

So then a long sauce is not over eaten and so much is there that there
is no earthquake. This does not mean that description.

Toss and spin and stay away and roll in hay in the center of the
afternoon of the same day. There is no use in all of that, there is no
use and that understanding is not reception it is a cook-stove solving
emigration. So then the union of the palm tree and the upside down one
makes a lying woman escape handling. So then the choice is not made and
the cause is the same. That was the period of that particular
punctuation.

A season of envy is a storm in the morning, a season of sympathy is any
way of leaving more behind than there was space to say that there was
hope.

The whole day was not more likely to be dark than the weather was to
have no refusal. And so the journey which did not make a winter had the
same time to escape and each one had something. Each one had a change.
The time of the return was not born as indeed it did not need to be as
any three have the same different meaning.

So one had a stone and some assistance and no more smoke than enough to
surprise a cloud. All the same there were different surprises and enough
came to be there so that the evening was the day before.

The other one was not leaning on a tree. This did not seem to mean more
than that any change brings some return and the return that has no
relief is that one which indicates more sections than the music that
stops.

There are three where there is no count made of more and one which was
the same as saying satisfaction, one had the same obligation and the
change was imminent and the obedience took that form and everything is
right which is the condition and no enlightment is more than continued.

If the length is in talking and if the disappointment is in despair then
the whole explanation has that meaning and no break is necessary, the
calm is just the same as no sofa.

A meeting is not the same as an excuse, a hope is not the same as a
relief, a fall is not the same as using more paper and collecting what
is apparent and necessary.

So the sun and the flowers too and there does not need to be water, the
sun and the flowers too have all there is of joining.

So the color and the black cucumber and anything that has the same color
and more sheets and any water and the placing of the piece and showing
that place later, all this makes more joining than there is grief.

So the larger size is not the last of all and the silence is larger. If
there is the filling any one is there and some one is willing. This
makes all of that precious matter. The system is in the spoon.

Signing that birthday means that the origin of every class is to be seen
by that feeling. So the season is longer and the moon which has not
travelled has not changed its face.

The music which is steady is just that and so there is so much to say
that nothing is too handy. This was not the most far away.

The tune was not that which sings for candy, not at all, the tune which
is celebrating is that which makes a sundial show more pleasure. This
was a witness and the likelihood of the result was shown in the
salutation. They march alone, they do not season the light. They are
more numerous. Following is something.

A pedal is heavy when there is a snore. Sing kindly with the silver
service near, sing the song with the pleasure of the incubator. Sing the
same seasoning. Use no partition, use that pressure of the accordion.

Lose the chief annoyance in the tall place where the intermediate thing
is seen. Surely it would sacrifice a place if there had not been a wall
that was wider.

So then a period has no place and all the tin is placed within, all the
gate is open to a push and more can come to stay there

A temper and a sound of explanation, the choosing of accompanying
celebration, all this does even more of a plentiful extreme and yet, why
when the hollow box is open is there more color than the rest of
fighting. There can be no cause, there is no inlay, there are more
places to close and open than there is maintaining a hopping branch. So
seasonably and with so much welcome does disappearance destroy
unexpressed reorganisation. This is not the way to do that. No way is
more clear.

To land a meadow and to scatter after is the morning. To season a liquid
and to fill the cooking is not any time. To scale a measure that has no
preparation is the indication of that.

Portion and dog and not escaping fitting is so increasing. It is perfect
last. So then there is no talk away. All the union is more. All the ten
are meaning.

If the whole show is there where there is glass, if the light is where
there is ground and enough water to keep all feet chilly, if the
disturbance is from laughing, and the welcome is when boards are put up
to finish something then certainly the whole experience is in the haste
and there is no time to use, there is no such order. This does not make
a presence.

So soon to be a sample of more than the tight shoes that show the
movement to be soft, so soon to be sacred in not having sorrow, so soon
to be placed where the race is between horses, all this is so soon if
there was a way to be sooner.

So long to be remaining when salt has no perfume, so long to leave out
what is not more than that matter, so long to have an orange and a nut
more than an abundance of butter, this does not mean that there is not
an origin.

So likely to speak and so soon to declare that a piece has been there
and there has been more hair. So well to endow what has reason to leave
if a fear is the same and the result has no grief. All this makes the
time and the use has that point and the same explanation does not deny
every joint.

Leave the pressing day-time and the pressing night-time leave it all
alone and it does not deny that meaning. It does not.

Limping in song, measuring a mile, seeing the tin and making an evening,
all this is autocracy. A bloom is on a splendid scarcity, it is so
gentle that there is no face.

Patience and to-morrow, a season and all the week, a programme has no
connection with Russia.

Twinkling so that there is gas, budding so that there is hair, blaming
so that there is pleasing, all along the heap of all.

To lie in the cheese, to smile in the butter, to lengthen in the rain,
to sit in the flour all that makes a model stronger, there is no
strangeness where there is more uselul color, a description has not
every mission.

Leaning together and destroying a principle preciousness which is not
mangled, this is so loaned that there is no habit, not at all and yet
there is the late way, there is an instance of more.

To be painful is not more than a street, to be a principal apricot is
not more than a cherry and yet there is an expression, there certainly
is.

Left hand and right, the knee and no chapter, the pleasure of prophecy
is in the direct adhesion of most of the pearls. This is so attending
and the mixture which is as yet a marigold has the proof and the price
it has all the constitution and the west of the dinner. This does not
mean more harm. It means the lingering station, it means appetite and
ice-cream. It does not.

Plaque which is not municipal and ardent is not more a stroke than any
birthday. So much is there no moon in the evening.

Name and place and more besides makes the time so gloomy, all the shade
is in the sun and lessons have the place of noon. There is no gender.

The best way is to say than an appetite resembles a season, it has fish.
Playing more means that a tail is in the kite and anyway of tying that
is dissimilar.

No season is plentiful, any season has more juice than snow, any season
is so rickety. The silence and the sinking of the morning sun means no
more than every habit. The town is in that place. There is a size
corset. The bloom is on the dog and the paws are startling. It lightens
more chain than a cockatoo. This does make a noise. This does show all
that.

An alarm has no button. This means that where there is undoubtedly a
magnificent heap of cats there is more there than any place there is.
There does show the authority that has no substitute. It must be
expressed that there is a difference between that which is seen and that
which is mean. Something must be the other. There is a name that is
written and printing does not mean. It means that very often and it
shows the same metal as the trial. There is so much use. When is there
more betrayal. The answer is always.

Pleading for a cat means no more than most and enough is celebrated to
distinguish every department. All the buttons are in the medium and they
do not shine more then that lead. There is such a heavy suit. There is a
tail. There is a bewildering distruction of simple linings. There is so
much ice-cream.

A lively letter is distributed in a pencil case and so the sweetness of
delight is so urged that tumbling is no nuisance.

So then the beginning has a piercing foundation. It agrees to all the
rest. It plans that spare ticking.

A bargain has lettering and it has more photographing than any amount of
musical instruments. It does sound a drum and a calendar. It does show
piercing likeness to it all and it is not leathery, it has no
consistence.

The gloom is not effaced by resignation, it takes more light than
dinner. It has it all. There is no choice.

An exceeding long stout single eagle is so situated that the afternoon
is sunshiny. The long simple statement of more makes an expression. It
shows the little weather. It shows the floor to be neater. It shows
loving. The silence which is outrageous is not so fatal as the corn that
is taller. Anyway all the sands shine and glass is plenty. It has that
choice.

Then came the rain, then came large pattering, then came the glass and
the little drops and many more, then came the time and the Hindoo, then
came more afternoons then ever, then came the distribution, then it came
there.

So obliging is an insight and so thoughtless are the plain painstaking
principles, how thoughtful they are and how they show the interest. How
they do diminish friction. How they do entertain royalty. How they do
not stay in the deep down. How they do not. So then the origin is told.
There is an ending.

A mend which shows no simple correction is not displaced by
organisation. So to mix and mingle, so to adjust center-pieces, so to
mingle ferns, so to embarrass every curve, is not the print of a
marguerite, it is so likely to shine.

The silence and squeaking is perculiar, the silence has the heat of the
waste paper. This does not make a balloon.

The tone and the flush is wetter, the tone is a standard and manufacture
is an outfit. There is cloth.

Pigeon is not liquid, it is not surgical, it is unpressed, it is
rejoicing, it is simultaneous, it is not particular, it is plentiful, it
is determined.

Powder is not elegant, it is not painful, it is meritorious, it is
twinkling, it is the weather.

Like the spoon and the educated banana there is no correct description.
There is light and there is manner, there is a touch of a splinter.

Seen in the hand there is nothing hiding, seen in the hand there is
lightning. Seen in the hand there is an eruption. Seen in the hand there
is recognition.

A brown subject is seen by the color. The red which is there is dark.
The blue is that color. If the time is a sensitive celebrity then a
piece of the paper is essential.

A splice is something that causes a connection, a spectacle is something
that causes that, a return is something that causes that. Old single
houses are established. A bed room is furnished. Lying in the same
position does cause that nice sound. There has been a dozen.

A state when there is no dirt is not so handy as flattery. A tongue
makes moisture. Sadness is plenty. The arrangement is at noon. The end
is wider.

No more eggs when they are sitting, no more pigeons when they are
cooing, no more landing in the market, no more stretching in the town.
No more of most cheese. No more is that.

The time to moderate a particular sale is when there is money and a
blessing, this is the time to begin the argument.

All the same nails have tacks and all the same hammers have tools and
all the same lights have that and all the same books have paper. This
does not make dirt. This makes that.

So to clean that stinking has that odor, so to clean that the feathers
are empty, so to clean and to age a winter means that changing a wedding
is over. The turn of the eight pieces are not blacker. The winking of
the faint flat-boat is not past. There is a station. There is a widow.

All the time that the old age is passed is that when the label is empty
and later any time later there is more breath and a little goose. The
time to smell anything is in the oven. All the paint shows that.

Speaking is not an opening, returning the bent candy is not audacious,
surely the polite sale is willful, surely there is more hope. All the
same the cause has the plain picnic, it shows such weather, it does not
shun clinging. So the candy is best hired and the long leaves have the
stem. There is no hot hindering.

Lie and die and seat the can where the change is most restrained and the
boots are all the shoes and the shoes are white and black.

See the whale and taste the butter, show the throat and make hands
whiter, if a nail is long and short then there is a in-between gold
fisher. He sees and he burdens no tail with more than that and if there
are then if there is one who says that and one who made that and one who
did that and one who saw that, if there are more ancient races than
there are puddings then certainly the universal standards are utilised.
So says the more that is pasted on the underneath portrait. There is no
change when it is given.

A dark start is a jump, a jump is a balloon, a balloon is not high,
there is no sky. The darkness is black, darkness is engaged, there is no
darkness, there is a protection. If the authority is mingled with a
decent costume then there is no question that a woman is asking
something. She is asking to be listening. This happens and what then,
there are indications. What are the indications. The indications are
these. The time to engage an evening is the same time as Saturday, it is
Friday. Friday is that day and there is a suspicion. There is every
suspicion. Every suspicion means some pains taking. There is a question
and then more talking is more occupying. There is a frugal use of
mutton. A chicken which is small has no finish. There are tears of
vexation.

So the long night makes no change and to be older is not different than
travelling. Travelling is necessary.

No back talk means more than conviction and to be convinced means that
there will be adaptation and no cause. It means something and the giving
of more means more. It means marriage. The marriage of two means more
than that, it means that something is not tiring and tiring is that
success, it succeeds no more than always. Always is more.

A Baedecker, that is to say, no division. A union, that is like that.

Bay is water, a lot is something, a stone is breaking, wedding is an
invitation.

Copy-right and see a burst of sun shining, long long and there is no
staggering.

True divorce means more than every occasion, a true divorce is a bend in
a branching, it is the obliteration of a case of congestion. True
divorce is an argument and a return, it is the same price as an
augmentation.

Once when there was a marked heel there was a time to separate together.
Once there was another time practiced. That lead more than habit. That
made one young man younger. All the time to stand and play meant that
the same suit was used. It was not permission.

A kindness and no hard hat, a center-piece and no new muff all this made
advice pleasant, it changed every hair, it was not duller. And yet that
energy was the same as the whole use of a portfolio and there never was
sickness and there never will be a necessity. All the winter months have
some of the sardines in summer. They make what does not do for skating.
They make a complaint and all four are not precise in saying nothing.
They disturb the bank and the blessing. There is no bleeding.

So then the change was spread and there was no sofa and there was no
pudding. Coloring was disappearing. There was no repetition.

As soon as grammar shows a sympathetic fraction then the time to elope
is the same as richness. Any letter shows that. A mingling of not
drinking is sweeter. There is no dust. There was a time when all the
teeth that were were so expressed that some effect was bitten and yet
morally, and morally is not a repetition, and yet morally the synonym is
not so excessive. A plunge is not more hardy than an allusion to
something. Photography is not agonising. It is a change in deportment.
It is accustomed to acceptation. It is not convenient in embroidery.

A blind page is one with edges and mingling, this makes it show when
there is opposition, this makes it show a sheet. And yet a plaything is
honorable and an extravagant silence is well spent and surely if the
temper show that then being happy is everything. Resembling is not a
suspicion. It is autocratic. There is no rebuke. A fence is not
furnished. No mind is matter. This is so little that there is no minor
mirror. All the tickling is tender.

There is no more use in the time of day than there is place for a water
pressure, not a bit and certainly the whole piece is industrious, it has
that sparkle. All the same the curiosity is that when there is all of
that the change is monotonous, it means union, it means the baking of
any piece of apple and pear and potato it means more than that. Kind
light is any light and the whole place is lighter. This means that if
there is an approach there is the use of the sprinkle and sprinkling is
so well when it is particular and playing.

To receive that and to cherish the remainder thoughtfully is so much
underdone that there is no kind of article. And yet there is a choice
and there is no refusal. This does not mean that the sigh is
intentional.

All the same to go and all the same to heat and all the same to wound a
pair of tables neatly. The time comes there and the return is the
mention of the plan of a rinsing. Every day is at eight. There is no
evening. The whole time is decorated. This is not more obliging.

If following where there is no mound makes a hill lively then there
comes a single neglect that never occurs. It is not emptied so.

Singular to be a number and a close leaning on a pin is so near
dirtiness. All the same the time is set and the tangling of no more
makes the hand-shaking. They know each other. They make that a meeting.

All the same there is no purpose in putting more there and cleaning a
door. A door which is not purple is not shut with pincers and the
hesitation is not unexceptionable.

Surpassing a union that is fostering a pleasant division does not make a
discussion utilitarian. The whole excuse is spent. A joint is shallow. A
reflection is catching.

They all see that. They all disturb a blessing. They all season some
soup, a soap is not splendid. A time and the practice is not abolished.
There will not be that clause.

All the currants that are ham are the ones that do refuse, and to choose
and to assemble means more burdening of a roof. The time is come and
more research shows that there is more than truth, it shows that any
vermillion has more than any question. It does show it and all the time
there is a question there is talking, all the time and more yesterday,
why more yesterday, because yesterday has all that reason and all that
cause and not suffering has more time to stay away.

If the time is the print of the joining of joy then the time is the one
that the use has felt come into plaster. This means that there is a
question. This means that if the time to state that there is an entrance
when there is a blight is the one that means an introduction then
certainly some difference is a determined passage and largely realising
more means private presence. Then too the same sound is not sweating
when there is no plate that shows a cover. This is so soon and to say
more means nothing being unhandy.

It happened that when there was the time and the result of more that
there was there everywhere and then the whole thing and it was not
finished there was not less admission. There did not come to be
chartering an inclined ceiling. This meant that there was not a mistake.

All the same the change was gradual and some grading is not in a garden,
it is in a sample of a ceiling and there is no freezing. This means that
the same time is occupied. It means that a whole might of loudness is
not lamer than anything. And yet it is not done and it is curtained by a
finish. This does make the whole holder and suction is not anticipated
emigration. No indeed there is not that victim.

Is it likely that if there is a receiving of many more little pieces in
a paper than there could be expected to be before the end of realising,
if there is is it likely that the reason there is nothing hidden is the
reason that there is no hiding. Is it likely. No question that has an
answer is in question. No question that has an increasing origin is a
question. If there is a question there is a question.

A curious recognition between meeting and passing is bewildering and yet
what is it that makes the preparation, it is that, it is the recreation
and the law and the spectacle of the electric moon-light and the stars.
All that has a time and a ticket. All that shows no price. All that is
not given. Not by any means is there giving and forgiving not by any
means. There is no palling so stern that it is resembling. There is no
sense so simple that it is resembling. There is no darkness so much
darker but it is darker the way it is darker. This does not mean that
there is any reason. It means simply that any excuse is related. It
means that no resemblance is more urged than that which separates a
family and children. This does not mean that anything shows that there
is a temporary absence of more. Nothing shows everything more plainly
and yet why is there more safety than numbers. Nobody knows the cloth to
be blue. Nobody knows and nobody says what everybody seats himself to
burnish.

He who is the time of day says he will and says he can and says he must
and says he has and says he says that he will stay.

No match that has a stick comes to be used when there is no single
little piece of a match that has a stick and is not used. Any one would
say that some give something. Any way there is no purse, anything is
daintier.

To be no more separated than by the divisions in the room does mean that
the thing is expected. To begin. The cause that makes a certain
pleasure receive more education than the use of a division is such that
no shade is ever needed for dressing. This does not mean as it might
mean that there is bathing. It means another thing. This thing that it
does mean is the same thing when there is every satisfaction. If that
states that the whole spell of white is not more needed than sunshine
then surely the scene is enough.

All the argument shows some cause and the cause is that if the habit
comes to be one then certainly there has been an excuse for a third
place. There is no tall window. This does not make sighing.

A little less of losing is not private. The time and the mind and the
sharp melody are all there when there is plenty. No climb is so hot as
the half day when there is no mention of a moon.

No target and no time and the time was when they walked separately
together. This time was not so pleasant as any other time because any
other time was as pleasant as that time.

The time when was when there was an occasion for returning a conviction
with no more restlessness than always. That was that time. In that way
there was no proof of a condition. There was no proof of any more
gratification when there might have been. This was so serious and so
placed and no more occupation was aroused than that which was reported.
This means that there always is rest.

So then to begin again and again and again. To begin and begin and to
begin again.

To begin again means that there is nothing more timely than the use of
any single and double argument. This is very timely.

Surely there is no doubt and there can be none because there was the use
in that speech, there was said that the time which was spent was not for
rent that is to say it was sold. That did not mean that there was
selling, that did not mean anything. It was said. To be sure if there is
no occasion for more than the recital of that some do so and it was done
and no moisture was so wet and yet there is moisture when there is
water, there is moisture and water.

Occupation, argument and reason and more than that, the place of a whole
distance. All this does not make a passage of time or distance. It is
the same as the best.

The sign that makes the whole length so long and so light is not the
same in the distance and with a measure. It is enough and a sense for
travelling is not misplaced. It is macademised.

If there is a change, and there is no change, if there is a change and
the window is a window seat, and the wall is a window, and the summer is
long, and there is no wet winter, if there is a change, and there is no
change, if there is a change then what is the difference between more
and most, what is the difference and why is the difference not so simple
as that. The difference is as simple as the difference between what
there is and what there is. There is a difference and there is no time
in which there is no reception of anything. There is not any effect when
the effect is not produced. And if there is no change, if there is then
certainly the whole explanation is not suggested. Nothing is suggested
when there is no passing away and into and around and there is no such a
thing, there is not any denial.

A pleasant use of a cockatoo is one that when it began made it begin and
when there was a color made a bright sun. This was so recent that
certainly there did not seem to be any meaning, there did not and what
was the result, any one asking any one is not asking any one that, any
one asking any one is asking any one why is there no retrospection, why
is there more furniture than there was when the houses were empty, why
is silence so anxious to please and so distressing, why is it all so
changed and so simple, why is there such a long shadow. Any one asking
any other one nothing is enjoying plenty of investigation and the
separation of that into retarded and elongated substance and simple
surface does not show any sign of increase. To decrease is not printed,
to decrease is not projected and yet the culmination of resistance is
resting and there is no rest when there is quiet and calm and it is so
restful to rest and not recite a poem. All the same there is no excuse.

A charge to a sausage is the swelling pepper. The lightness and the
relation and the hole all this together makes a seating figure.

The kindness in a circle and the use of a blue green tear makes a
picture so large that there is no astonishment.

If the way to change the face is not used then there is not a bit of use
in restating a comparison. The whole thing is so completely the rest of
the difference that there is no alteration.

A park a whole park is a place with trees and mice and darkness and a
horn and all the best ways of smelling flowers. A park which is not more
is not lovable. It is as simple as that.

If the time is not shown by any change in the outside plum-tree what is
the difference between that and an elbow. There is and doubt which is
dead has died.

A death which is so becoming is so much seen by an emotion. The whole
temper that is changed is not identical.

A smooth and simple trunk with lettering, a bark that has no roughness
and a newspaper all this together makes printing and this is not
disappointing, it is so singular that there are four esses.

It is like this, put a little place that is not empty and not wide and
not urgent, put that little place where it is and do not remember that
there was no opportunity, do this and what is the result, it is done.

A loud name is not one not shouting, not at all, it is so singularly not
feeble that every astonishment is practical.

All the same there is no obligation and in any case why is there fearful
repeating why is there when there is no heaven, why is there. No
question has such an answer, no question is so dissimilar.

To drink and have a drunkard drinking means that no approach is filled
up with tables. It is so spacious to have a table widen, so spacious and
so absorbing and so selective.

Then there is placed there that which if the predicament is not
outdistanced means that there is posthumous fame, this means that there
was a violin and a widow and a melodrama, it means more than that it
means that there was a friend and a closet and most of the coloring
matter, it means more than that it means silence and it does mean a
declaration that has memories, it does mean all that and any one is
frightened any one is frightened who does not remember. To be peaceful,
to be calm, to have a ticket and a feather and to mean that a table is
necessary all this together does arouse resentment. Suppose there was
nothing done at any rate singing is not more than reciting and reciting
is not more than dancing. In any case a swelling has plenty of the same
endearment and the peace of an organ is that which is most handled.

There is no dispute when there is music, none at all and a window any
window is above, it is so above that the climate and the stables and all
the cleaning comes to be in place of cooking. The one way to eat is
perfect, there is so much to telephone.

All the same there was misunderstanding, there was misunderstanding,
there was a description and in any case what is a discovery, a discovery
is the exact space covered by the moving example. That is it and no
dispute shows any more heat than there is.

A cushion, no fan and no rose, no cushion no fan and no rose, no rose
and no fan, no fan no cushion, no cushion no rose. The silence began
with flowers, it went on longer.

The next margin the margin that had no existence, the next margin was
that which if there were many present there was no way of exerting
excitement. This was not silence, it was silent.

The only spreading was when the number was the same, this moment was not
mingled with expectation, it had no such occasion.

It was a single breath in a circle, this which was of all sizes was so
placed that there was silence.

The length of a refusal was expressed in irritation. When is there more
recollection than force. There is more recollection than force when
there is no occasion and more pricelessness.

Saving money, saving if from an occasion and saving it when there is a
change of hymning, changing the whole escape that is not a rhapsody, it
is the place of thunder. The sale and the water, the whole hating of
argument and agreement these are not changing with winter, winter does
not need rain, it does not need any day, it needs tunneling. All the
same there is a difference. There cannot help being a difference and in
any case there is no shame, there is no authority, there is no habit,
there is nothing, that is to say that is not the way they are feeling
about it. Not at all. What they are feeling is this. They are feeling
that the time is there where it was and that not being so they are
certainly sure that the obligation is not pressing. That is what they
are feeling and in any case there is no hesitation. Hesitation does not
take time, why should they take time, they do not use that argument,
they are not so to speak exchanged.

Very well, supposing that the time which is spent is so spent that there
is memory, suppose this, cause no gloom and have success, what does that
mean, that means nothing. To mean that there must be some authority and
what does authority mean, authority means no more yellow color as yellow
is the color that is chosen and no slight is necessary. If no slight is
necessary then there is a center piece. All the kindness shows, what
does it not show, what single separation is there in two decorating an
original explanation, there is no use in tears, there is no use and
there is no sobbing. Silence has the pleasure of an interval and the
cross means separation. Supposing there was a cross, supposing that when
the moment came there was crossing, supposing all that would there be
any use in recognition. Would there. There is no doubt that the result
in not pleasing and there is no doubt that there is no desertion. There
is no pliability in a curtain, it does not show more night than it has.
All the same there is the place to join three together. To deny that is
to displace the whole example which is the part article. Managing it all
shows the connection, it shows nothing in the place of certainly. Grief
is not agitation.

Showing it that there are no spreads which are changed, showing it so
shows the choice, it shows the sagacity. There is no look.

A cake, a cake which is not the size mentioned has a button in it and
this button is the very button that is in the lobster, the meaning of
this is seen in metal, for instance, supposing a class which makes a
necktie changes color, supposing it does that give everybody joy, it
does. At the same time the predicament is in the middle and it being in
the middle and there being a regular circumference the finest
estrangement comes from intermittance.

So much kindness matters when there is the question and what of a
meadow, why is a meadow green. So much kindness matters when there is
repetition and there is repetition in a saloon, there is no dirt
anywhere. All the same the discussion has no resistance and the change
which is announced does not differ in degree from that which accomodated
with regular day-light shows no separation. All the talk is chosen and
all the urging is contemporary.

If the time happened to be pleasant and the rain happened to show that
water was industrious, if all the heat was in a sitting-room and
darkness settled down over a lamp, if all this happened separately there
would be the same astonishment as in every case and yet the whole
endurance of perplexity is under what is not ever over and exasperated.
All the extreme respect is countenanced, all the satin shoes have soles,
all of them and no doubt mixed when mistaken.

A cook does not mean that there is cooking. Cooking is establishing a
regulation which when it is suggested means that anything that is
boiling is not withstanding cooking. In the same way the establishment
of registration that is to say the exercise which makes falling so
uncertain that there is no question, such registration does mean that
finally, very finally there is an excuse for following. In any case
there is so single dislike.

An outline, outline, what causes hesitation, does outline not cause
hesitation, why is certainty disgusted by a waiter, why is the selection
of more than there is not established by selection, why is reasoning
clear, and estimation precise, and articulation unnecessary, and
disintegration avoided, why is it, and more than that when does the
resolution come that shows in a description, when does it come and why
does it determine no return, and what particular transaction shows more
intelligence than ever.

A labor, a labor consists in a list, a labor consists in a reduction in
minerals, a labor consists in authority.

Shame, there is shame, there is a date, there is betrothal, there is
sweetness.

No better juice than lime juice, no better juice than lemon juice, no
juice at all, no water, no sugar, no dirty glass. All this shows
antagonism.

Hide decent pepper, hide nothing clean, hide nothing and the prince is
perfect. Why is there no slender pine-tree, there is no slender
pine-tree because horror is loaded and the principal shadow that
indicates a memory is that which is not any size.

A distance, a distance is that which being placed in the beginning of
lettering shows no more curve than there is in a single sight and this
does not mean dispute, why is there dispute in tears, there is dispute
in tears because dust, no dust is thickened by cream, it is thick, cream
is thick, cream has that color and that odor and that stretch of
especial surprise. How sweet is the light in a ladle and how dark is
daintiness, how sweet is anything and how sweet is that which is
particular.

Laying an egg this is the occupation of a horse, laying an egg every
egg, laying every egg this is the period of fasting. Not lying in the
midst of more oysters than anything, not lying down in drinking, all
this shows no shrinking. All the time that is spent is communion,
communion is that occupation which is audible.

Soap is not only a hope it is a release. When is it a release, it is a
release when the quiet is so great that no sound whistles.

A lively wedding is not useless, it shows action, it shows measure, it
shows union.

A change into a result means that nothing is overthrown.

Incase a whole heap into a piano, suffer the piano not to have keys, be
careful of any examination that is not cured, show that the color
softens and then say that there is observation, say it, does this make
any one sad, it does and it does so because that weight which is that
woe is so tardy and so surrounded and so sensitive in circulating an
ending that there are no signs of babies and yet babies are not younger,
at least they are not so much younger.

It came, the time came to explain that since if there is the whole
surrounding surface and that is a stable full then certainly there can
be no sign of rubber.

That was one way to serve a banana which was a fig in the cooking.
Another way was the one which showed no beginning. This one did not urge
a man, this one was so soothing that there was no vacation. The length
of days do show lengthening when the days which were shorter and longer
were seen by there being resuming. In any case length and length is
particular in any case length is not strange when there is a
resemblance. Length and strength, strength and no length, all length and
all strength and all length and strength all these together make an
exhibition and a return and a certainty and a despair and a disjointing.
All the crackers have ginger and yet there is no use in eating why
should there be eating so early every day and there is a diferent
automobile. Why should there be contribution.

All the same there is a chance to be undermined, there is a very good
chance and there is no sleep, there always is sleep in a bakery. This
does not make a cause.

Wasting historical burning, wasting perfume and juice and all that,
wasting silk and a machine, wasting all that.

The retirement of Sunday is no choice, it means walking, it means a
return, it means scaling the season in between wet weather and sunshine.

A hurt stove and a certain cure this makes a doubt that is perfect.

Likely to be very likely to be copied, any little thing has no name.

Pain killer and a husband cleaner, any little place is the same as
empty.

A lamp, supposing a lamp has a volume and a broom, supposing it has,
supposing there is catarrh, supposing coughing is peculiar, supposing it
is not, if it is not why should hushing be synonymous with a mixed up
engagement, why should it when there are fears.

The time that begs a listener go to stay, a single shape that has no
obligation, a light idea that mixes all disdain, all this together shows
the effect, it shows that there is no use in limpness and eternal
fainting.

Why should merchants be strong and acrobats weak, why should they, there
is no question.

A carpet, what is a carpet, a carpet is something that is not dusty,
that is not delapidated, that is neither perspiring or draughty, that is
not perfect or determined. A carpet is something that, judging from the
beginning, from the middle, from the end, is not necessary when there is
no necessity for it. A carpet is such a thing and the choice of it, the
choice for it, all that is done to declare it is just the search for
the truth, for the darkness, for delicacy and for reason. All this is
not strange.

Kindling in between paper and anything, kindling is so white that it is
useless to show the color of paper, it is quite useless and yet wood
which is wood and which is paper is so splendid.

Acting together always acting together there is so much choice, there is
the choice first of all the wholes and then more places are filled and
there is every choice. Filling is splendid.

The time which is limited is that which is chosen and the necessary
statement is that in the beginning there is no swelling, in the middle
there is no dwindling, in the end there is no division. This is the
order of the referred elongation.

A quiet scene in a laughter does not shine away.

Consider the climbing that circles and celebrating sees the outline.
Consider that and measure, measure and receive the carmine. Consider no
smoke, consider no orange, consider no flower, consider no clambering
creeper, consider no outburst and no incline, consider no silence.

Capable of a recital, inches of inside measure, all the western window
wet and no smoke settling, all this and a hurricane, is a flight simple,
it is not babyish, it is not surgical.

The proposition is that a certain relation between the merit which is
and the merit which is is that which pertains to a master line. The
presence is that that which is the region is not only a realm it is a
preliminary. All this shows in shadow and in shouting there is silence
and a celebrity. All this shows in wounding and in loving all the mound.
All this shows a widening and excessively excessive round. All this
shows a vineing and it shows so much meal purge and such searching that
any silence which is eloped is that which is restrained from resting.
This is not silence.

A tooth when is a tooth empty, a tooth is empty when conduct is
preferable.

A lingering period is not shortened by melting axes, it is not even
shortened by a humming sound.

Quiet very quiet and no paper, very quiet and no tangle and nothing
solitary and not even a wounded sermon. None of these show choking.

To show a variation there is no place so recent that there is not a
crack and a selection. To be violent is not so necessary but that if
there have been witnesses there is blossoming. So much courage, so much
magnitude, so much sorrow, so much exchange, so many mingled
interstices and so many meadows why is the exchange perfect, it is so
disorganised.

The credit that comes from interregulation and motionless maritime
industry shows no sign of diminishing when there is a call for mountains
and character.

The special relation of more to most and gradually to reincarnation, the
special relation of the mingling to effervescing and the resolution to
intervention, the very especial relation of observation to analysis and
the joint to a foot all this is so critical that there cannot be an
occasion.

What is struggling, it is a recognition of a surface that has so many
additions that there is use in a climax. This does not mean steadying
and despair, it means no more than the tiniest the very tiniest example
of a blot and a simple exercise in righteousness and no excuse.

The season which is free and the season which is the same is so firm, is
so particular, it is so begun that necessarily there are circumstances.

What is a word that says resemblance. The word is so seen that there is
nation and a nation and nations and in nations. The sight of all of it
is not a circus it is not even a parting, it is more than that, it is
all.

So the inclination scatters and the regret paces and the stirring
cinders stick where they are. And the little tag is empty and the larger
couch is simple and a discharge, every discharge is within matter.

Compliance, what is compliance, it is authority and retort and a medium
declaration of fitness and agility and solemn use of patience. All this
does not disease a stomach or distress a vaccination, it does not even
halt admiringly.

The time was splendid, any single nation was not of a speed that showed
slackening and regular expulsion. More of it was renounced and a slave a
real slave is somnolent, a real slave rests in potatos and anything
onion.

A shadow, a living shadow is in quantity and design and distribution. A
regretted shadow is in organisation and distribution and retribution.
Any shadow is famous and any face is soon painting. Any heroism is hard
limited and any line is fabulous, and the church any church is taken
when there are windows and a winter waiting, any likelihood shows that
red.

A lake, springing into a waggon and having wheels totter and having all
the water suffer, this is obliging.

Fancy a cylinder, fancy it in a letter, does that show slouching.

Sweep and settle, circulate and rejoice, reject a morsel and suffer
suffer lightly and in a measure.

Search a hindrance, see obligations resemble china, see no more tunes
and no more harshness and hardly any virgin.

Climb and dine and shine and show a shadow a single tiny blessing, a
decanter, show it in swimming, show it in a pudding, show it in an
aquarium, show it as it is sudden.

Dating a gently soft boiled egg that is boiling does not mean that there
is any hurry or that there is any comparison. Dating it is momentary and
a schedule and it has that sobriety, it has that, it certainly can
devise ways of encouraging more things than have been collected. It
certainly will.

A lameness is no structure, that is enthusiasm, that is liberty and that
too that is a chance.

Labor which is rapid is so silent that there are pins. Is this straight
in summer, it is in winter, it is charming in winter, it is choice in
summer, why is there caution, why is there a chapter.

Pointing in the direction which makes pets and pillows and a flight and
an interval and even more, pointing that way makes a negro say that a
negro has color and is not a stranger, it makes him say out right what
there is to see in lamp light and in a faded china cover and even in a
little bit of carpet. This is so neat and so careful and really
cautious, this is the best example of the change that has made no body
more restless than the best hammer.

It can not be said that one man singly is enough to show that one man
searchingly does cover all. There is no doubt that pushing is pressure
and relaxing is concentration and nobility, nobility is the same. There
is no doubt that something is boundless.

There can be no date backwards and faintly forwards and all together.
There can be no date and there certainly can be no heavy esteem. There
can be no satisfaction and no special cases, there can reasonably be no
minor survey.

All this makes a date and a rescue that is to say green is not so green
and what is delicate is delicate, and doubt sweet doubt is dimpling. The
garden all the garden is triangular and a hand a whole band is a
careless symptom. The change is not ordered, it comes from surviving
vegetation. This which is so obliging and really so attuned to all that
nervousness that makes the final coat a mixed color, all this together
shows the same black. Suppose black is black. Suppose it has a different
color, suppose it has a black color, does it make any difference in
describing, does it even make any difference in recognising a different
thing together, does it even show when it is handsome. These questions
come crowding and after that the time shows that the best way to
disappear is to undertake to refuse to stay and at the same time to go
away, that is to do that when that which is industrious is toilsome and
intelligent.

A strain any strain means that there is no accident and no eye sight,
not even plaintiveness.

To suggest wounding, this is so much mixed with care and with eye
glasses and even with opportunity, can there be negligence when there
are so many willing, can there be mistakes when so many have married and
are marrying, can there be fellow feeling.

A sparkle a single sparkle makes wishing fatal, a single earnest
merriment makes a mark on a slice of something.

Splendor, why is splendor careful, splendor is careful because all the
royal family have been popular. They have been popular how, they have
been popular by actions and by more secrets than are shown by inviting a
single reader. So elementary is the rising sand and the twisting snow,
so vacant is the lot and the fountain, so hurried is the Indian and the
dancer, so neglected is the hurt finger and the duck, so splendid is the
lamp and so urgent is the white horse in winter that surely there can be
no question of discount, there can not even be question of serpents,
there can be a heaven and a heel and there can be lakes of water.

A town a single town, a trunk, a whole and the same trunk, a piece of
colored marble and even a can that is sinister, all this shows whining,
it shows so many sacks and bottles and a finish oftener.

Winding and not clinging, selling and not sobering, reason why is not so
course and broken as yesterday with music.

A little lameness is a stern name for an excuse.

What is lively. That which radium advances and porches close and lynx
eyes shudder. It is a gloom and entrancing is captivating.

The example, the only example is mistaken and a murmur, it is jotted and
likened to more special reductions.

A tall scale, a sour glass, a tight stretch, an even table, a celebrated
circus and a melodion, these and many more mistakes have no attributes,
they are careless.

The reason why running is no exercise is that when the heat is hot there
is no borrowing and when it is not there is no refuse.

A leaning left and a lounge in might, a thorough rest and a pleasing
rib, a rate that shows thoroughly, this is more logical.

That which when the local which is color and the local which is butter
and the local which is a mask and color and the local which is a
decoration and a platter, that which when the local spectacle is traded
away for something established to be regular and surprising and
unwillling, that which is the scene of an auction is the time when a
name is stronger and old age which is fifty is sixty.

A blessing is that which when the time is one minute shorter and the
disappearance is extraordinary and not continuous a blessing is that
which when there is a tender waiter shows no increase in haste.

A language traded for tobacco, a language even traded for more corn than
ever was changed to be no sweeter than candy and sugar, a language
traded for tobacco and very likely for anything not used in any original
occupation, a language that is so fit to be seen exasperated and reduced
and even particular, a language like that has the whole rake that makes
the grass that is green smell green.

A weight, what is a weight a weight is a lifting of cows and horses and
bridges and everything.

Pavement which is clean, a disaster a single disaster is not in shooting
but in being a reasoner. There was a pause.

Careless of lingering, careless of betrothal, careless of a caravan,
careless and unusual, not so careless at a picnic, not so careless in
perusal, not so careless in a moustache, not so careless and usual, not
so careless.

A quantity counted, does that mean a b c d or does it mean w and x y z
further, does it or does it mean more.

A center to a prepared and biangular pedestal is so special that there
is no care and no spectacle further than just enough to show the reason
of the respect and the careful surmounted dangling.

A season to oppose is that June day and that appetite that being
particular is so festooned is so evenly arranged and so darkened that
despair all the occasion for more and most and mighty is in the denied
robbery. Is there robbery, why is there no claret and fish, why is there
none so handsome and love all love and giving voice, does giving voice
mean rejection and argument and even attribution.

The sand paper is not hazardous and fathers are dead. What are fathers,
they are different. The casual silence and the joke, the sad supper and
the boiling tree, why are bells mightily and stopped because food is not
refused because not any food is refused, because when the moment and the
rejoicing and the elevation and the relief do not make a surface sober,
when all that is exchanged and any intermediary is a sacrificed surfeit,
when elaboration has no towel and the season to sow consists in the dark
and no titular remembrance, does being weather beaten mean more weather
and does it not show a sudden result of not enduring, does it not bestow
a resolution to abstain in silence and move South and almost certainly
have a ticket. Perhaps it does nightly, certainly it does daily and raw
much raw sampling is not succored by the sun.

A wonder in a break, a whole wonder and more rascality in a slight waste
and even that so infinitely noised even that is not a disaster in
splendor and more titled climaxes more titled climaxes have miserable
second voices than any voices and away is more than the resemblance that
is necessary. Is it astonishing that red and green are rosy red and
voilet green, is it surprising that so rich a thing shows a certain
little thing, shows that every bit of blue is precious and this is shown
by finding, by finding and obtaining, by not silencing disentangling, by
never refusing resigning. All the blank burden and surely there is none
in a particular discreet turning, surely there is no unit in smelling
and no market in market gardening. This is not true. It is not even in
worth.

Even even more than a cellar more loud than a sun, more likely than a
sturgeon, more likely, most likely, this was so bright and so occurrent
and so bees in wax, bees and bees in wax.

What is cat is a cat and what is splendid is a mouse and what is driven
is a dog and what is curly is a cow.

A loss a whole loss is an irregular fancy and no result is more
announced than that which is no change. All the same there is boundless.

A top is on the tidy road no more than it was and what is more lasting.
Everything is most lasting.

A parlor, what is a parlor, a parlor is a cook. What is a cook a cook is
a cross between odor and perfume. What is an odor and what is perfume.
An odor is a singular glance and milk and lightning, a perfume is an
article and an expected space and even an authority. What is a singular
glance if it is that and wider, what is milk and there is that
altogether, what is lightning and there are no widows who are cleaner,
what is an article when there are regular festoons and what is an
expected space and what is more than the same which is actually to be
splendid. These are the signs that make reaching so necessary, they are
also the signs of an exceedingly pronounced tendency. Supposing no one
sees clearly that the end has not come. Supposing no one sees more
clearly ever. Does that mean that there is no regret, does that even
mean that the loudest resemblance is stolen by shoving. No more is
necessarily used in an individual recitation.

The pretext of a sack of no more than three yearly is not a sudden
resolution, it is not carried away by pay. Paying sweetly and paying
neatly is so like lounging and suspecting everybody where there is no
habit of black and lace.

What is the wonderful example of a discovery what is it. Is it in a pea
and clover, is it in the sighing of a house and the pleasant escape of a
sash. Is it more in the heavy notes and in the love of a hook, is it
really more in the dark and in patch work. Is it more in the hurry of a
sudden falling of a particular cat, what is it more in than in the rest
of renouncement, in what is it more. It is more in the water, it is more
in the tree, it is more in the house, it is more in the court and in the
hall and in the trifling heap of stones crossed early by anything
waiting.

Wait for the pound and a half of sauce, wait for the best oil and no
scarcity, wait for the paper spread to dry, wait for anything that is
not burning heavily. Wait and do not diminish a ribbon yard, wait and
select the same before, wait and see the best and love it through and
love it with a widening dainty door. Wait and mingle nothing sweet, wait
and beg the time to stay, wait and go and go away, and wait when all is
simpler.

Bet so heavily with a wife that sooner the wedding will be early yet,
bet and shadow the least flower there so that growing is ingrowing
longer and shorter. Growing longer is growing everywhere. Growing
shorter is growing and growing more there. Growing longer and growing
shorter and growing is not an established result of a weight in the leg
that is altogether.

Why when the purpose is in stretching should not stretching mingle with
stretching in the ending, why should it not and what is the hurry when
any strange stick is in all the best window.

All the choice of cold and curls, all the choice, all the animal which
is the same as a tick, all the animal which is the same as a Hindoo, all
the animal which is breakfast and really breakfast, entirely breakfast.

All the animal which is oak walnut, oak shrub trees, oak butter. All the
animal which is vines and arches all arches, all dark red trees, all wet
white trees, all white green trees.

All the animal is silent in left over bundles, in the box of bundles, in
the ride on returned bundles. All the animal is in the bath dish, in
the stop watch in the left leg.

All the animal is in the way, in the way, and in that way. All the
animal is in that way, in the way, and in that way, the way.

All the back is in that harness, entirely surprised, not more sunburned.
It is not in the poison oak, not in that more rested entirely.

A loud man eater, a loud lonely decay, more sponges and more excellent
angels and extreme inhalations and reasoning, inclining reason.

Lay the most perfect sweetness and separation and appetite and leaking
grass and fading, simple ecstatic fading. Lay the first winter and any
summer and more wishes all separately in together. Make the pet a whole
pet. Make the powder wall full of turning. Make the exception unanimous
and under thrown. The worry of sea bathing is enormous.

A bother that comes yesterday and shows no cake does not show midnight
or noon. It which is silent is not so seldom a poised vessel and a luck
finder and certainly is not any savage in cake. Not at all.

A crowd all the exchange that social excuse and sweet singing in a noisy
street can mean to a tune is necessary when there is no talk. It is
necessary.

Cups, when are cups splendid, they are splendid in chunks and in pieces
and in places. They are splendid by the short way there is more
collection. They are always splendid entirely.

A more sullen supper and eating is entirely repeated. It is entirely in
a show and even in a whisper in any loud whisper softer. A survey is so
weak and more checkers any more checkers are solemn and loud and wild
waveringly wet. All the best is in times and much suddenly secreted is
so hurried, so very hurried finely.

A very fine handsome and not more elegant than wistful certainty is so
included.

Work in the late sad sweetening red ferns and lift the bell so that
there is no closet, search and shake the best example and never shudder
in the cuddling water. See the silence rest in black and suffer all the
spoons to wander, allow the more to see it with the glass and bestow
more actual prunes than stay together.

Do not act more in the marguerite and shine with the best eddying work
table set easily on a table. Rattle and strain and shove a calendar and
more much more is the same reason and mightily in time, mightily in
time.

A sweet thing is a sweet relation and a smile a smile is all that gate,
a smile is separate and more inclined altogether and a rate a whole
rate is so that there is a violet to relate. The time the best time is
all together. A time is in the velvet.

Wag and a waggon, wide and wishing, window and charging.

All is good in cooking, all is good in shaking, all is good in
sacrificing a nut and corsets.

All is behind a closed dark scuttle, all is priced in sucking solemn
sardines and outrageously, outrageously quickly soon.

Wait and finish a speck of a pantaloon with old places, old places, old
places.

Supposing there is no white enamel, supposing there is no dark cloth,
supposing there are not butter jerks, supposing there are.

A cluster means a countenance, it always does, it cannot but choose to
be cautious and unnecessary and in a study. It cannot suggest a better
way to be taken. It cannot take a use. It cannot stay spread in a vacant
space emptily.

Any occasion to see the splendid having Saturday is the one that makes a
double doleful. Any west resemblance is nightly.

Relaxation in ornament is concave and not dainty, it is so winsome and
entwined, it is so arranged and saintly. The market garden shows the
stolen likeness and more chats and more tooth brushes in a plot. The
earnest courage is complicated with the understanding that is likely and
ferocious and more necessary than altogether. Tooth cake, teeth cake,
tongue saliva and more joints all these make an earnest cooky.

Plunging into the middle mingling, wedding the worrying, and teasing the
trying, meddling with more and fathering a single sunshine, all this
makes much hut and more much more.

The window rest is more in than out entirely.

The pen within is more there than before.

The cutting stands are more shadowed than rainy.

The outside is more dreadful than water, the rest is more excellent than
impaired. The licking is with a spoon spreading and a question of oats
and cakes, a question of oaks and kinds a question is so stately.

If the best full lead and paper show persons and the most mines and toys
show puddings and the most white and red show mountains and the best hat
shows lamp shades, if it is the sterns are sterner and the old bites are
bulging and the best the very best of all is the sunshine tiny, is the
hollow stone grinding, is the homeless wedding worrying.
